Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Knowledge-Based Systems
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/knosys
Addressing hallucinations in generative AI agents using observability and 
dual memory knowledge graphs 
Amali Matharaarachchi
a, Harsha Moraliyage
a, Nishan Mills
a, Gihan Gamage
a, 
Daswin De Silva
a,∗, Milos Manic
b
a La Trobe Artiﬁcial Intelligence Institute, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia
b Department of Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth University, 23284, Richmond, VA, USA
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Keywords:
Hallucination
AI Observability
Knowledge graph
Generative AI agents
Agent reasoning
Retrieval augmented generation
 
a b s t r a c t
Generative AI has rapidly progressed from chatbots and assistants to agents across diverse applications and 
domains. Generative AI agents demonstrate sophisticated operation through autonomy, tool use and decision 
making with minimal human input. Despite these performance gains, agents are still impacted by the foun-
dational limitations of Generative AI models. Among these, hallucinations are a major limitation that aﬀects 
agent operation in real-world settings, leading to risk and loss. Several recent work aim to address hallucina-
tions through methods such as retrieval-augmented generation and reﬂection prompting, however, these only 
provide partial improvements. An eﬀective yet underexplored approach is in the observability data generated 
by an agent in its deployed and operational settings. Drawing on agent observability data, this paper proposes a 
dual memory knowledge graph approach that integrates Semantic and Observability Memory to address hallu-
cinations in Generative AI agents. Semantic Memory provides organized domain knowledge for precise factual 
grounding. Observability Memory transforms logs, traces, and execution results into agent validated planning his-
tories. Hallucinations are then addressed by grounded planning in veriﬁed past interactions with known, reliable 
outcomes. This approach is evaluated in a two-stage experimental setup aligned with its dual memory design. 
Observability memory is evaluated on the HotpotQA dataset to assess its impact on reasoning grounding, us-
ing metrics that capture both factual accuracy and reasoning hallucinations. The SM3-Text-to-Query benchmark 
and Synthea-based medical QA datasets are used to assess factual grounding of the semantic memory. Results 
from both experiments demonstrate reductions in hallucinations, with semantic memory for contextual ground-
ing reducing factual hallucinations, and observability memory for reasoning grounding reducing faithfulness 
hallucinations.
1.  Introduction
Generative AI has achieved signiﬁcant performance gains across di-
verse benchmarks [1] and eﬀective application of automation and aug-
mentation in diverse practical settings [2]. Despite this success, Gen-
erative AI is still impacted by the foundational limitations of lack of 
a world model, hallucinations and bias [3]. Hallucinations are a pri-
mary limitation as it aﬀects downstream implementation of Generative 
AI such as in chatbots, assistants and agents. Hallucinations undermine 
human-AI trust and pose major risks in high-stakes application settings 
[4,5]. Hallucinations often arise from ﬂawed reasoning, or the absence 
of veriﬁable memory. Although grounding responses in past interactions 
and veriﬁed knowledge is a widely practiced method of hallucination 
mitigation, doing so eﬀectively is more complex [6]. Unlike standard 
∗Corresponding author.
 
E-mail addresses: A.MatharaArachchige@latrobe.edu.au (A. Matharaarachchi), H.MORALIYAGE@latrobe.edu.au (H. Moraliyage), N.Mills@latrobe.edu.au (N. 
Mills), G.Gamage@latrobe.edu.au (G. Gamage), D.DeSilva@latrobe.edu.au (D. De Silva), misko@ieee.org (M. Manic).
Generative AI applications that generate responses in a single forward 
pass, AI agent systems decompose user queries into structured subtasks 
executed iteratively. These agents rely on external tools, perform long 
horizon planning, and reﬁne the output through feedback loops [7]. As 
a result, hallucination in agents can emerge from generation errors, in-
accurate planning steps, poor memory recall, and misaligned decision 
sequences. This makes hallucination a multi-step failure rather than a 
single point error [8]. Widely used frameworks for building Generative 
AI agents such as Autogen [9], Taskweaver [10], and Semantic Ker-
nel [11] adopt varied execution models, from collaborative multi-agent 
loops to planning-ﬁrst architectures [12]. Despite the diﬀerences, these 
systems share a common modular structure comprising four key com-
ponents: memory, planning, action and reﬂection [13,14] (see Fig. 1). 
These modules help interpret user intent, track execution history, and 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2026.115469
Received 7 September 2025; Received in revised form 28 December 2025; Accepted 1 February 2026
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
Available online 7 February 2026 
0950-7051/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 1. Common modular structure of Generative AI agents composed of memory, planning, action and reﬂection.
Fig. 2. Conceptual framing of the proposed dual memory knowledge graph approach for addressing hallucinations.
coordinate tool invocations. However, current implementations fail to 
retain semantically relevant memory, detect and avoid repeated failures, 
and maintain coherent long-term planning across interactions.
To address hallucinations, this paper draws on observability data 
contained in agent operation logs, tool calls, intermediate output, and 
errors already recognized in prior execution, as a foundation for struc-
tured memory and planning. This paper presents a dual memory knowl-
edge graph approach based on semantic memory and observability 
memory for agents to recall validated behaviors, and leverage stored his-
torical evidence during planning and generation. This approach trans-
forms observability from passive monitoring into active memory that 
reduces hallucination. This approach is designed to complement exist-
ing reasoning frameworks such as ReAct and Reﬂexion. It provides a 
domain-agnostic memory layer that enhances these systems by supply-
ing reusable validated traces and structured domain knowledge, allow-
ing agents to operate with more grounded, and context-aware reasoning. 
Fig. 2 provides a conceptual framing of this approach where incoming 
queries are classiﬁed into intents, entities, and attributes, which anchor 
retrieval from both semantic and observability subgraphs.
This uniﬁed schema supports memory-augmented planning by link-
ing current tasks to prior tool calls, outcomes, and validated planning 
paths. Based on recent work on structured memory architectures that 
distinguish episodic experiences from factual grounding [15,16], the ap-
proach further integrates a hallucination mitigation layer and a pruning 
mechanism to preserve a reliable and reusable memory store. Together, 
these components enable grounded, auditable, and self-improving agent 
behavior.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents 
related work in generative AI agents and addressing hallucinations, 
followed by Section 3 presenting the dual memory knowledge graph 
approach, including knowledge graph design, query classiﬁcation,
memory construction, validation mechanisms and a case study demon-
stration. Section 4 presents a series of experiments evaluating the impact 
of observability memory on reasoning grounding, the contribution of 
semantic memory to factual grounding, the computational eﬃciency of 
the dual memory system, and the eﬀectiveness of the validation pipeline. 
Section 5 concludes the paper.
2.  Related work
Generative AI agents have progressed from single-turn prompt ex-
ecution to modular systems capable of multi-step planning, tool invo-
cation, and reﬂective reasoning. Frameworks such as Autogen [9] and 
Taskweaver [10] coordinate multiple agent roles through iterative di-
alogue and tool use. Despite these architectural advances, agents still 
hallucinate due to fragmented memory, weak factual grounding, and 
limited ability to reuse validated planning behaviours. As highlighted 
by Shah and White’s critique “Agents Are Not Enough”[17], architec-
tural modularity alone cannot overcome fundamental reasoning limita-
tions; resilient systems require structured mechanisms that incorporate 
historical execution traces into the agent’s decision process.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) remains a widely adopted 
method for mitigating hallucinations. Traditional vector-based RAG 
[18] retrieves semantically similar text but often surfaces broad or
partially relevant passages, particularly in multi-hop or compositional 
reasoning tasks, leading to context drift and factual errors. Recent sur-
veys [19–21] note that vector-space retrieval struggles to preserve rela-
tional structure essential for precise grounding.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
2 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Table 1 
Comparison of the proposed dual memory knowledge graph approach against related approaches.
 Method
 Trace Reuse
 Ctx. Ground.
 Reason. Ground.
 Hallucination Type
Reduction Mechanism
 GraphRAG [22]
 –
✓
 –
 Factual
Structured graph retrieval
 ODA [23]
 –
✓
✓
 Action/decision
Observation-driven action feedback
 ReAct [27]
 –
 –
✓
 Reasoning
Step-wise tool-informed reasoning
 Reﬂexion [28]
 –
 –
✓
 Reasoning
Self-critique of intermediate steps
 Self-RAG [29]
 –
✓
✓
 Factual, reasoning
Retrieve, generate and critique loop
 Toolformer [30]
 –
 –
✓
 Tool misuse
Pretrained tool-use demonstrations
 Ours (dual memory KG)
✓
✓
✓
 Factual, reasoning
graph-based retrieval for context grounding, validated 
trace-based reasoning grounding
GraphRAG approaches [22] address these issues by organizing re-
trieved knowledge into structured subgraphs aligned with query se-
mantics. This improves interpretability and supports more controlled 
grounding than vector methods. However, these techniques focus exclu-
sively on external factual knowledge and do not incorporate execution 
traces, internal agent behaviour, or reusable planning histories. In con-
trast, our semantic memory forms only one half of a dual memory archi-
tecture, explicitly complemented by a structured observability memory 
that captures agent experience.
Knowledge graphs have been used for tasks such as contextual search 
and semantic retrieval, but more recent work incorporates KGs into rea-
soning and planning. Observation-Driven Agents (ODA) [23] employ 
KG-based feedback loops to inform action selection, demonstrating the 
value of structured observations during execution. Other KG-augmented 
methods explore knowledge-aware validation [24], graph-of-thought 
planning [25], or prompt tuning with retrieved triples [26].
Reﬂection-based methods, such as ReAct [27], Reﬂexion [28], and 
Self-RAG [29], reduce hallucinations by prompting models to critique or 
reﬁne their intermediate reasoning steps. Similarly, Toolformer [30] im-
proves tool usage through self-supervised tool-calling demonstrations. 
However, these techniques primarily employ ephemeral reﬂections: in-
termediate reasoning and tool outcomes are discarded after the session, 
and do not accumulate into a persistent memory structure.
Our approach extends reﬂection-based reasoning by transforming re-
ﬂections, root-cause analyses, and execution outcomes into a persistent 
observability memory. This enables long-term reuse of validated plan-
ning trajectories and systematic avoidance of recurring failure patterns. 
This design is aligned with emerging work on using real-world agent 
logs for transparency and governance, such as Clio [31], but goes fur-
ther by operationalizing logs as an active component of planning and 
reasoning rather than solely for auditing. The combination of semantic 
grounding and structured observability memory forms a dual memory 
approach that supports robust, trace-aware agent behaviour. A compar-
ison of these approaches and our dual memory approach is provided in 
Table 2.
3.  Methodology
This section presents the dual-memory knowledge graph approach 
in terms of its key functions of semantic memory focused on domain 
knowledge and observability memory based on agent execution traces, 
tool usage, and reﬂective insights. This structure grounds agent behav-
ior in both external truth and internal experience. The proposed dual 
memory approach is agent-agnostic: it operates independently of the 
agent’s internal prompting strategy, since it grounds reasoning through 
reusable observability traces and vocabulary-aligned semantic retrieval 
rather than relying on a speciﬁc decision-making algorithm.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, this agent-agnostic dual memory knowledge 
graph approach is generated and maintained through a modular struc-
ture consisting of four components. First, input data streams represent-
ing agent observability, including intermediate reasoning steps, tool in-
vocations, outputs, and other application-level traces are pulled from 
observability storage logs. These logs are processed by the Log Transfor-
mation Module, which cleans, structures, and prunes them into reusable 
reasoning experiences. Next, the Diagnostic Module identiﬁes reasoning 
failures, performs root-cause analysis, and generates reﬂective insights 
to support adaptive plan revision. As part of this validation pipeline, 
knowledge-based veriﬁcation and human-in-the-loop review are per-
formed to distinguish successful runs from failed runs, yielding action-
able insights for future planning. Afterward, the Classiﬁer Module per-
forms vocabulary-based tagging to align incoming traces, incorporating 
both insights from the Diagnostic Module and experiences from the Log 
Transformation Module with a shared ontology that is also used to anno-
tate domain knowledge. These insights and experiences are then stored 
in the observability memory of the dual memory knowledge graph, en-
abling eﬃcient retrieval and context-aware grounding for the AI agent’s 
ongoing decision-making and planning processes. By integrating the 
dual memory into each agent stage (as observed in Fig. 1), the pro-
posed approach enables traceable, veriﬁable, and agent planning with 
adaptive memory [15].
3.1.  Knowledge graph design
Eﬀective agent planning requires two distinct memory functions: ac-
cess to veriﬁable external knowledge and reuse of past execution experi-
ence, and these represent the two complementary subgraphs: a semantic 
memory and an observability memory, uniﬁed through a shared vocab-
ulary (Fig. 4).
The semantic memory encodes validated domain knowledge, includ-
ing entities, attributes, and facts extracted from documents, databases, 
or APIs. It stores provenance details such as PDF locations, database ta-
bles, or URL references, enabling direct citation and traceable evidence 
during inference. This supports graph-based retrieval-augmented gener-
ation with high factual precision (Figs. 5–7).
The observability memory captures historical agent behavior, deci-
sion traces, and reﬂective outcomes, organized as linked plans and steps. 
This enables few-shot planning by retrieving successful past executions 
for similar query types and improves reasoning through insights gained 
from past reﬂections.
To unify these graphs at runtime, this paper adopts a shared vocabu-
lary binding strategy. Each user query is classiﬁed into high-level labels 
(e.g., intent, entities, domain attributes), which serve as routing keys 
for both subgraphs. The same vocabulary schema is applied when in-
gesting domain facts into the semantic memory and when constructing 
nodes in the observability memory, so that both graphs expose a com-
mon label layer above their internal schemas. These labels are encoded 
into node annotations in the semantic memory and planning metadata 
in the observability memory, allowing the agent to retrieve both factual 
and experiential context through the same interface.
The observability KG nodes are stored independently of the semantic 
KG nodes in the same knowledge graph as two subgraphs, allowing each 
memory system to evolve at its own rate while maintaining data isola-
tion. Although both graphs diverge in structure and update frequency, as 
the semantic memory is relatively static and the observability memory 
evolves over time, the shared vocabulary provides a lightweight align-
ment layer that allows heterogeneous sources to be associated through 
common labels rather than strict schema matching.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
3 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 3. Modular composition of the proposed dual memory knowledge graph approach.
Fig. 4. Dual memory knowledge graph structure with shared vocabulary binding.
3.2.  Vocabulary-Based query and data classiﬁcation
To improve retrieval eﬃciency and planning precision, this approach 
employs a shared vocabulary classiﬁcation mechanism applied at both 
query time and data ingestion. The Classiﬁcation Module decomposes 
incoming content into this shared vocabulary. Since agent systems typi-
cally operate within a bounded domain, a ﬁxed list of intents, attributes, 
and entity types is provided as soft constraints to improve consistency. 
In-context prompting avoids heavy ﬁne-tuning and enables rapid adap-
tation to new domains. The resulting labels are embedded directly into 
graph nodes, enabling eﬃcient and semantically aligned retrieval across 
all components of the agent system.
This mechanism ensures consistent annotation of user input, domain 
knowledge, and observability traces using structured labels: intent, at-
tributes, and entities. These three facets constitute a compact coordina-
tion layer that enables alignment across heterogeneous sources without 
requiring brittle schema-level mappings.
The shared vocabulary provides a minimal, suﬃcient abstraction for 
linking the semantic memory and the observability memory:(1). Intent: 
captures the reasoning pattern required (e.g. lookup, comparison, multi-
source aggregation) and guides which subgraphs or past experiences are 
relevant. (2). Attributes: describe coarse semantic types involved in the 
query (e.g. course, academic term, subject), enabling type-consistent 
alignment between domain content and past traces. (3). Entities: pro-
vide the concrete conceptual anchors mentioned in the query or trace 
(e.g. a speciﬁc course code, a named certiﬁcate program), allowing ﬁne-
grained retrieval and trace matching. Together, these labels act as stable 
semantic join keys that unify structured domain knowledge and unstruc-
tured execution traces.
Importantly, deﬁning the inventory of intents and domain attributes 
is a one-time setup step, usually performed by a human expert, reﬂecting 
the scope of the application domain. Once this vocabulary is established, 
no manual curation is required for individual queries or traces.
Based on recent work on unsupervised semantic clustering from 
large-scale dialogue data [31], a lightweight LLM-assisted classiﬁer is 
used to extract these labels in three key scenarios: 
1. Query-Time Classiﬁcation.
Each query is mapped to a tuple <intent, attributes, entities>, which 
serves as the routing key for retrieving relevant experiences and in-
sighs from the observability memory and routing key <attributes>
for extracting relevant domain context from the semantic memory.
2. Source-Time Labeling.
During domain ingestion (e.g., reports, catalog entries, documents), 
the same schema for <intent, attributes, entities> is applied to tag 
items with the same vocabulary, ensuring that semantic content and 
observability traces are indexed under a uniﬁed representation.
3. Observability trace labeling.
As observability traces are processed by the Log Transformation Mod-
ule, each validated experience and each diagnostic insight from 
observability traces is assigned its own <intent, attributes, 
entities> tuple before being persisted into the observability mem-
ory.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
4 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 5. Classiﬁer module for structured semantic representation.
This uniﬁed labeling allows the system to dynamically annotate new 
queries and execution logs while maintaining alignment across hetero-
geneous sources. Each plan and step inherits its <intent, attributes, enti-
ties> labels, ensuring that both graphs expose the same label interface 
and can be referenced consistently during retrieval and planning.
3.3.  Observability logging and graph-Based memory construction
To address reasoning-related hallucinations, the approach distin-
guishes between two forms of observability: a raw execution log and a 
structured observability memory. The raw log records the full sequence 
of the agent’s actions and intermediate states, but it is used solely as 
an input source for extraction. Only the validated reasoning traces and 
synthesized diagnostic insights derived from these logs are retained in 
the observability memory.
AI observability tools typically export logs in a structured format 
and assign labels that distinguish reasoning-related records (e.g., model 
outputs, intermediate chains, tool calls) from infrastructure-level traces 
(See example in Fig. 6). The Log Transformation Module uses these labels 
to automatically isolate the portions of the log that correspond to the 
agent’s reasoning process. This eliminates manual curation and permits 
a scalable, automated pipeline for transforming raw logs into structured 
observability memory. 
Conceptually, the construction process of the observability memory 
consists of the following steps, as further depicted in Algorithm 1: Col-
lecting execution traces from the AI observability tool, Extracting the 
reasoning traces of the agent, Performing diagnostic evaluation to iden-
tify successful and failed traces, Retaining veriﬁed successful traces as 
reusable planning examples, Storing failure-related insights separately 
for guidance and error prevention. Section 3.4 further describe how the 
methodology perform further diagnostic evaluation to identify success-
ful and failed traces. 
Only validated execution paths are stored as reusable plans, while 
failure nodes contribute diagnostic insight without inﬂuencing di-
rect imitation. This dual treatment supports safe memory reuse and 
grounded future planning.
Algorithm 1 Observability-to-KG Transformation Pipeline.
1: procedure ProcessLogs(𝐿)
2:  
𝑅←FilterRelevant(𝐿)
⊳ retain only reasoning-related 
log entries
3:  
𝑇←ExtractTrace(𝑅)
⊳ reconstruct task-speciﬁc 
reasoning trace
4:  
𝐷←Diagnose(𝑇) ⊳ evaluate success/failure and extract 
insights
5:  
if 𝐷.success = true then
6:  
PersistExperience(𝑇)
⊳ store validated trace as 
reusable experience
7:  
else
8:  
PersistInsight(𝑇, 𝐷)
⊳ store as insight for plan 
reﬂections
9:  
end if
10: end procedure
The observability process is formalized through a domain-agnostic 
schema. Table 2 deﬁnes the core ontology for logging decisions, reﬂec-
tions, and outcomes. Each observability trace is anchored by a unique 
run identiﬁer (e.g., q123_20240617T135402), which is recorded across 
all graph components. Preserving this identiﬁer across every knowledge 
graph node enables full trace reconstruction, even for discarded or failed 
branches, as long as raw logs are retained in archival storage. This de-
sign supports downstream auditing, failure replay, and root-cause anal-
ysis without bloating the observability memory.
These observability-based approach transform raw execution data 
into a reusable planning scaﬀold, allowing the agent to learn from its 
own planning history, not just static text.
3.3.1.  Observability graph maintenance
The observability graph is maintained as a bounded memory rather 
than an accumulating log store. Only a curated set of recent, val-
idated traces is retained as observability information is used for
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
5 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 6. Before/after comparison of raw observability logs and the cleaned reasoning trace used for observability memory construction.
Fig. 7. Asynchronous Observability Log Pipeline where planning logs are streamed and later processed by the Log Transformer Module into reusable graph triplets.
Table 2 
Core ontology for observability data with examples aligned to the education-domain eligibility case study.
 Node Label
Key properties
Example instance
 :Query
query tokens; user intent; embeddings; at-
tributes - domain labels
{query: ‘‘Am I eligible for the diploma if I finished high school 
and met the English requirement?’’, intent: ‘‘eligibility_check’’, 
attributes: [‘‘program_requirements’’,’’prerequisite’’,’’score’’], 
entities: [‘‘diploma program’’,’’English minimum score’’]}
 :Plan
trace; insight; diagnostic signal; optimal ∈
{true,false}
{trace: ‘‘…‘‘, insight: ‘‘Ensure requirements come from the correct 
program; do not mix rules.’’, optimal: true}
 :Step
type ∈ {retrieve, verify, compare, summa-
rize}; status ∈ {ok, fail}; observation
{type: ‘‘retrieve’’, status: ‘‘ok’’, observation: "Diploma program 
requires completion of high school and minimum English score of60.′′}
 :Tool
name; conﬁguration; source type
{name: ‘‘program_requirements_api’’, config: ‘‘institution: 
AU_College’’, source: ‘‘institutional_policy_document’’}
 :Output
answer;hallucination score ∈ [0,1]; human 
rating ∈ [1,5]
{answer: ‘‘Yes, based on the published requirements, you meet the 
eligibility criteria.’’, hallucination score: 0.03, human rating: 4}
reasoning support. This method does not require frequent updates 
as periodic refreshes incorporating recent successful traces are suf-
ﬁcient to maintain planning stability. To control graph growth, the 
KG enforces strict node count limits. When the node limit is reached, 
the KG applies a selective sliding-window strategy: recent validated 
traces are retained, while older traces are considered for removal. 
This process is not strictly chronological as the system preserves high-
value traces, such as those with reliable human ratings and those 
frequently re-used in planning. Only redundant or low-utility traces 
are removed. This bounded-memory design keeps the observability 
graph lightweight, eﬃcient, and aligned with the agent’s evolving
behavior.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
6 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
3.4.  Semantic graph organization
Recent literature consistently demonstrates that graph-based re-
trieval methods, such as GraphRAG [22], substantially outperform 
vector-based RAG in mitigating hallucinations [20], the present ap-
proach adopts graph traversal as the primary Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (RAG) mechanism and does not attempt to propose alternatives 
or improvements to GraphRAG itself. Instead, the methodology adopts 
a domain-agnostic shared vocabulary that narrows the retrieval sub-
graph and improves relevance and latency. This design is motivated 
by the practical observation that domain applications are typically built 
around a ﬁnite set of well-deﬁned sources; for example, in an education-
domain system these may include program guides, institutional policies, 
accreditation documents or course catalogues. Each of these sources 
serves a well-deﬁned intention: looking up degree information, identify-
ing course requirements, or retrieving institutional policies. By encoding 
such intentions and semantic types explicitly through the shared vocab-
ulary, the retrieval process is automatically restricted to the subgraph 
that matches the query pattern.
Before ﬁnalizing the base ontology, it is important to consider the 
downstream usage of the agent. To generalize across heterogeneous 
sources, the semantic memory organizes information using three ele-
ments: (1) Statement - factual domain data extracted from the source 
about an entity and (2) Source - provenance markers linking statements 
to their origin (e.g., documents, tables, APIs). (3) <intent, attributes, enti-
ties> - Statement is passed through the shared vocabulary classiﬁer and 
assigned with <intent, attributes, entities> using classiﬁcation module. 
These are connected using simple but extensible relation: (1) Statement 
→ [SUPPORTED_BY] → Source. Domain Data are labelled with attributes 
and entities.
To achieve this integration, two storage strategies are available:
1. Full Materialization - all extracted facts are directly stored as graph 
nodes and edges, including data from PDFs, SQL tables, and APIs. 
This yields low-latency, single-phase RAG, but can lead to storage 
overhead.
2. Hybrid Materialization - only semantic highlights (entities, at-
tributes, facets) are embedded in the graph. Source content remains 
in native repositories and is fetched on demand during inference. 
The KG stores pointers via stub nodes (e.g., DocumentStub, SqlRow-
Stub, ApiStub).
In the hybrid approach, RAG proceeds in two stages: Phase 1: re-
solve graph pointers and extract source metadata. Phase 2: retrieve con-
tent from external repositories using context-speciﬁc extractors. While 
hybrid storage optimizes for scalability and data freshness, it demands 
additional handling, such as extractor modules, fallback logic for un-
available data, and circuit breakers for slow APIs. In contrast, full ma-
terialization simpliﬁes planning and retrieval, but becomes impractical 
for large or frequently updated datasets. These strategies reﬂect trade-
oﬀs discussed in the broader literature on knowledge graph engineering, 
particularly with regard to balancing retrieval utility, storage cost, and 
update latency [32].
3.5.  Validation pipeline for memory-augmented agent planning
Eﬀective agent planning relies on two capabilities: reusing veriﬁed 
strategies and repairing failing ones. In the proposed system, these ca-
pabilities are orchestrated through a structured validation pipeline that 
evaluates intermediate outputs, diagnoses failures, and guides corrective 
actions after processing observability traces through the Log Transforma-
tion Module. This layer ensures that planning experiences and insights 
persisted in the observability graph remain reliable and aligned with 
quality standards.
The diagnostic pipeline consists of three cascading validation steps:
1. Root-Cause Analysis and Feedback - The Diagnostic Module evaluates 
observability traces processed by the Log Transformation Module. It 
identiﬁes whether a run succeeded, classiﬁes failures using a prede-
ﬁned taxonomy (e.g., timeout, tool misuse, reasoning errors), and 
records a root cause and explanation. When a failure occurs, the Di-
agnostic Module synthesizes a short explanation and may recommend 
a repair strategy (Fig. 8). These insights are stored in the observabil-
ity graph and later reused to guide agent reasoning.
2. Knowledge-Based Veriﬁcation - Traces exhibiting missing or incon-
sistent responses relative to the retrieved context are marked as unus-
able for persistence in the observability memory. The veriﬁer applies 
faithfulness-oriented hallucination detection metrics (Section 3) to 
evaluate factual consistency.
3. Human-in-the-Loop Review - For scenarios requiring expert over-
sight or where automated checks reach their limits, a Human-in-
the-Loop (HITL) stage is required. In this stage, human evaluators 
assess the quality of a trace using a 1-5 rating scale based on cri-
teria, such as correctness of intermediate reasoning, alignment be-
tween reasoning and ﬁnal answer, and appropriateness of the solu-
tion. These ratings are persisted on :Output nodes as human_rating
properties. When multiple raters are involved, their scores are aver-
aged, and traces with high rating variance may be ﬂagged for further 
adjudication. the HITL stage is designed to reﬂect how oversight op-
erates in real-world, large-scale systems. Rather than requiring ex-
haustive human review, the system supports selective or risk-aware 
validation, in which automated stages surface ambiguous or high-
impact traces for prioritized human inspection. This enables expert 
judgment to be applied where it is most valuable while keeping the 
process scalable. On subsequent runs, plans with low average human 
scores are deprioritized even if their automatic markers are positive, 
ensuring that expert standards inﬂuence the search heuristic.
Only ﬁnal answers that pass all validation stages are committed as 
reusable experiences in the observability memory, while failures are 
recorded as diagnostic insights. Over time, this process (1) biases plan-
ning toward higher-quality traces, (2) reduces reliance on trial-and-
error, and (3) maintains an up-to-date model of what constitutes eﬀec-
tive planning within the domain. Thus, diagnostic insights and veriﬁed 
experiences jointly bridge real-time planning with long-term memory 
optimization, enabling continual improvement of the agent’s planning 
policy.
3.6.  Demonstration
The proposed dual memory knowledge graph is demonstrated in this 
section for an AI agent operating in a tertiary education setting, pro-
viding responses to program-related queries. As illustrated in Fig. 9, 
the input user query is ﬁrst processed by the Classiﬁcation Module, 
which produces a shared-vocabulary tuple. Using the extracted <in-
tent, attributes, entities> labels, the relevant domain context is extracted 
from the semantic memory. This step reduces factual hallucination by 
grounding the answer in structured, pre-existing knowledge rather than 
model-internal assumptions. The same vocabulary tuple is then used to 
retrieve past validated reasoning traces and diagnostics from the observ-
ability memory. These experiences supply more relevant reasoning pat-
terns, reducing faithfulness hallucination, while the diagnostics provide 
reﬂective constraints (e.g., preventing the agent from presenting over-
lapping requirements across diﬀerent programs). All retrieved facts can 
be tracked using observability traces to semantic KG nodes. The vocab-
ulary tuple also makes routing decisions explicit, showing exactly why 
particular context was retrieved from semantic graph. Reasoning exam-
ples and insight nodes are similarly traceable, providing a transparent 
account of how the ﬁnal answer was produced.
4.  Experiments
We empirically evaluate the Dual-Memory Knowledge Graph across 
multiple dimensions to assess its impact on hallucination reduction. 
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
7 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 8. Diagnostic Module for Root-cause analysis and feedback.
Fig. 9. End-to-end workﬂow of the dual memory knowledge graph in an education-domain advising query.
First, we examine how observability memory improves reasoning qual-
ity by comparing baseline agents with variants augmented with dual 
memory integration. Additionally, the semantic-memory experiment is 
included solely to demonstrate the behavior of vocabulary-conditioned 
subgraph retrieval and to verify that, in our setting, structured graph 
queries can retrieve focused factual context more eﬃciently than a 
simple vector-based RAG baseline. Furthermore, we quantify computa-
tional overhead, analyzing retrieval times, token usage, and number of 
LLM-calls introduced by the dual-memory design. Finally, we assess the
eﬀectiveness of the three-stage validation pipeline, demonstrating pro-
gressive improvements in ﬁltering precision for reliable exclusion of 
erroneous traces. Collectively, these evaluations show that the dual-
memory architecture enhances agent reliability while maintaining prac-
tical eﬃciency. Pre-processing pipelines, datasets, implementations, and 
evaluation scripts will be made available in our public GitHub repos-
itory, following the review process. https://github.com/CDAC-lab/
DualMemoryKG
4.1.  Evaluation metrics for hallucination reduction
We follow the hallucination taxonomy of Huang et al. [21], which 
divides hallucinations into two categories: Factuality Hallucination and 
Faithfulness Hallucination. In our evaluation, we used factuality met-
rics to measure the impact of the semantic memory, and faithfulness 
metrics were used to assess the observability memory impact. The com-
plete list of metrics used to evaluate both the observability and semantic 
subgraphs is further explained in Table 3. 
Given the lack of metrics that directly evaluate reasoning perfor-
mance, we implemented custom DeepEval metrics named Instruction 
Inconsistency Score, Context Inconsistency Score, and Logical Inconsis-
tency Score as depicted in Table 3. These metrics focus on evaluating 
the reasoning components of the observability subgraph. We also in-
clude the exact match metric, which evaluates whether the ﬁnal re-
sponse matches the dataset’s gold answer and serves as a general ac-
curacy measure across both experiments.
4.2.  Stage 1: Evaluating the impact of observability memory
Observability memory was evaluated using both a ReAct-style agent 
[27] and a Reﬂexion agent [28] on the HotpotQA [34] dataset. A ran-
dom subset of 100 instances from the dataset’s training split was exe-
cuted through the agents, and their raw execution logs were captured 
using the LangSmith observability platform [35]. These logs were pro-
cessed asynchronously by the Log Transformation Module, which ex-
tracted reasoning traces and passed them through the Diagnostic Module 
for validation, as described in the methodology section. Only validated 
successful traces were persisted as reusable experiences in the observ-
ability memory, and diagnostic outputs from failed runs were stored as 
insights. All observability data was stored in a Neo4j Aura instance [36] 
using the ontology deﬁned in Table 2.
To evaluate the contribution of reasoning grounding, we compared 
the baseline ReAct and Reﬂexion agents against versions augmented 
with observability-guided retrieval from the observability memory. 
Since observability memory primarily targets faithfulness hallucina-
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
8 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Table 3 
Mapping hallucination types from Huang et al. (2025) to evaluation metrics used in this work. All metrics are implemented using DeepEval 
[33].
 Category
 Metric
Explanation
 Factuality Hallucination
 Answer Relevancy Score
Measures the proportion of output statements judged relevant to the user query, in-
dicating how well the ﬁnal answer stays on topic; lower scores indicate irrelevant or 
oﬀ topic responses [33].
 Faithfulness Score
Measures how well the model’s output aligns with the retrieved evidence by comput-
ing the proportion of generated claims that are truthful with respect to the retrieved 
context [33].
 Context Precision Score
The Contextual Precision metric evaluates the retriever by measuring how well it 
ranks relevant nodes above irrelevant ones, using a weighted cumulative precision 
that emphasizes correct ordering at the top of the retrieved context [33].
 Faithfulness Hallucination
 Instruction Inconsistency Score
Measures whether the answer adheres to the user instruction; deviations indicate in-
struction following failures.
 Context Inconsistency Score
Measures contradictions between reasoning steps or ﬁnal answer and retrieved con-
text.
 Logical Inconsistency Score
Evaluates internal logical coherence; higher scores indicate ﬂawed or invalid reason-
ing steps.
 Bad Tool Calls
Fraction of tool calls that has failed due to errors due to incorrect tool names or wrong 
tool inputs, which indicates hallucinated reasoning.
 Total tool Calls
Total number of tool calls taken; excessive calls reﬂect ineﬃcient reasoning steps.
Table 4 
Hallucination metrics for ReAct and Reﬂexion agents, with and without observability-
augmented knowledge.
 Metric
 ReAct
 ReAct + Obs.KG
 Reﬂexion
 Reﬂexion + Obs.KG
 Overall Performance (Higher value is better)
 Exact Match (Final Score)
 0.59
 0.63
 0.63
 0.70
 Faithfulness / Reasoning Hallucination (Lower value is better)
 Instruction Inconsistency
 0.53
 0.52
 0.43
 0.42
 Context Inconsistency
 0.17
 0.14
 0.09
 0.03
 Logical Inconsistency
 0.47
 0.47
 0.39
 0.37
 Bad Tool Calls
 0.19
 0.18
 0.13
 0.09
 Total Tool Calls
 1.71
 1.65
 2.14 
 2.11
 Factuality Metrics (Higher value is better)
 Answer Relevancy Score
 0.89
 0.90
 0.90
 0.92
 Faithfulness Score
 0.74
 0.81
 0.85
 0.90
 Context Precision
 0.53
 0.53
 0.58
 0.65
tions, errors in reasoning steps, we report reasoning-oriented metrics 
as the main indicators of improvement. However, because stronger rea-
soning can indirectly reduce factual hallucinations, we also evaluate 
the factuality metrics to capture the secondary beneﬁts of reasoning
grounding.
For this experiment run, 200 random samples from the HotPotQA 
dataset’s validation split were used, the full results are tabulated in
Table 4.
Across both agent types, observability-guided reasoning yields con-
sistent quantitative gains. Exact Match improves for ReAct (0.59→0.63) 
and more strongly for Reﬂexion (0.63→0.70), indicating better align-
ment of ﬁnal responses with the dataset’s gold answers. Reasoning also 
improves, most notably in context inconsistency, which drops from 0.17 
to 0.14 for ReAct and sharply from 0.09 to 0.03 for Reﬂexion. Instruc-
tion inconsistency shows smaller but consistent decreases across both 
settings. For logical inconsistency, Reﬂexion shows a modest improve-
ment (0.39→0.37), while ReAct remains unchanged. This indicates that 
observability memory either improves or preserves logical coherence de-
pending on the agent architecture, with stronger beneﬁts observed when 
combined with reﬂective reasoning mechanisms. Tool-use quality also 
improves, with bad tool calls reduced for both agents, marginally for 
ReAct (0.19→0.18) and more substantially for Reﬂexion (0.13→0.09), 
alongside slight reductions in total tool calls. In the HotpotQA setting, 
fewer total tool calls indicate more precise and targeted tool usage, as 
successful reasoning requires retrieving the correct supporting facts with 
minimal intermediate steps. Thus, reductions in total tool calls reﬂect 
improved reasoning eﬃciency.
Factuality metrics showed steady secondary beneﬁts from im-
proved reasoning. Answer relevancy increased for both agents (Re-
Act: 0.89→0.90, Reﬂexion: 0.90→0.92), and faithfulness improved from 
0.74 to 0.81 for ReAct and from 0.85 to 0.90 for Reﬂexion. Context pre-
cision also increased across settings (ReAct remained stable; Reﬂexion: 
0.58→0.65 improved), indicating that more accurate reasoning steps 
translate into more reliable factual grounding.
Overall, these results demonstrate that the proposed dual memory 
knowledge graph framework with validated observability traces sig-
niﬁcantly enhances agent reliability by producing fewer reasoning er-
rors, making better-informed tool calls, and delivering more accurate 
ﬁnal answers. These gains highlight the practical value of observabil-
ity not only as diagnostic tools but as an integrated reasoning sub-
strate that strengthens both reasoning and factual grounding in modern
AI agents.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
9 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Table 5 
Results of factuality hallucination metrics.
 Method
 Latency (ms)
 Success (%)
 Relevancy (%)
 Faithfulness (%)
 Precision (%)
 Vector-only QnA
 4485.16
 56.04
 94.50
 97.80
 59.34
 Microsoft GraphRAG
 55487.26
 15.55
 58.24
 96.29
 22.08
 Graph-based QnA (Ours)
 3884.16
 86.81
 97.80
 99.78
 87.91
4.3.  Stage 2: Evaluating semantic memory
This experiment evaluates semantic memory for factual grounding, 
comparing it against a vector-RAG baseline. All queries were ﬁrst pro-
cessed by the Vocabulary-Based Classiﬁer Module, which generated 
structured tuples of intent, entity, and attribute to guide precise sub-
graph retrieval. The experiment uses the SM3-Text-to-Query benchmark 
[37], built on the Synthea synthetic patient dataset [38], to create 
a question, cyphers and answer set for evaluation. Initially, subject-
predicate-object triples from Synthea dataset were extracted to con-
struct a Neo4j knowledge graph [39], resulting in a ﬁnal graph, in-
cluding: 8,516 nodes and 150,675 relationships. This graph was used 
to retrieve contextual information via Cypher queries, which were 
generated dynamically based on the user’s question. The retrieved 
results are injected as context into the LLM prompt. As the base-
line, a vector-RAG model which uses the same underlying data is 
embedded using a SentenceTransformer model. Given a query, vec-
tor search is used to retrieve top-k similar snippets, which are then 
passed to the LLM as context. Both systems share the same summariza-
tion model, GPT-4o [40] and prompt template to ensure a controlled
comparison.
In addition to these baselines, we also performed an evaluation using 
Microsoft GraphRAG. Although GraphRAG is designed for broad knowl-
edge exploration and summarization like tasks, we included it here to 
show that a simple, domain-anchored graph retrieval workﬂow can be 
more eﬀective for structured domain tasks that require precise, local-
ized information. To enable GraphRAG processing, the Synthea triples 
were converted into a text-based corpus following the library require-
ments. We selected local search mode because the SM3 questions target 
localized, entity-level facts, whereas global search returned broader sum-
maries that aligned less with these queries.
Each system was evaluated using the factuality hallucination met-
rics in 3. The results of this experiment are presented in Table 5. Graph-
based retrieval outperformed vector-RAG in both factual alignment and 
response relevance. The latency for Cypher queries was lower on av-
erage than the full vector search, likely because Cypher returns pre-
cise, targeted results, while vector-RAG retrieves longer, less focused 
documents that increase prompt size and LLM processing time. Graph-
based QnA outperformed vector search in the answer relevancy score, 
indicating that structured retrieval yields more on-target concise an-
swers. Although both methods achieved high faithfulness scores, the 
graph-based approach further reduced residual hallucinations compared 
to vector-only retrieval. The graph-based system showed stronger pre-
cision compared to vector-only retrieval. It reﬂects fewer hallucina-
tions and tighter contextual alignment when using graph-derived facts. 
This conﬁrms that even when backed by the same language model, 
the semantic retrieval structure alone plays a crucial role in hallucina-
tion suppression. Furthermore, GraphRAG showed higher latency and 
lower relevancy and precision in this domain setting, reﬂecting dif-
ferences in retrieval granularity and the structure of the input data. 
Overall, the graph-based QnA system demonstrated fewer hallucina-
tions and tighter contextual grounding across all factuality metrics. 
These results show that, even when using the same underlying language 
model, a vocabulary-guided simple graph retrieval workﬂow can bet-
ter support structured domain queries that rely on precise, entity-level
context.
4.4.  Computational cost and eﬃciency analysis
This section evaluates the computational cost of augmenting ReAct 
and Reﬂexion agents with the proposed dual memory knowledge graph 
approach. Since graph construction occurs oﬄine, three online opera-
tions contribute towards computational overhead: (1) vocabulary clas-
siﬁcation, (2) semantic context retrieval, and (3) reuse of validated ob-
servability traces.
As shown in Fig. 10, the dual-memory KG-augmented ReAct agent 
reduces agent execution latency from 9.10 s to 7.44 s, while maintain-
ing comparable total latency (9.16 s vs. 9.66 s). Token usage is modestly 
reduced, with total tokens decreasing from 2346.68 to 2326.34, and 
LLM-call frequency remaining eﬀectively unchanged (3.05 vs. 3.06). A 
similar but more pronounced trend is observed for the Reﬂexion agent, 
where agent latency decreases from 25.91 s to 23.51 s and total token 
usage drops substantially from 7321.04 to 6529.34, alongside a reduc-
tion in LLM calls (7.59 to 7.40). Across both agent families, the modest 
overhead introduced by observability-guided retrieval is largely oﬀset 
by reductions in reasoning steps, resulting in improved execution eﬃ-
ciency without increasing inference-time cost.
As shown in Fig. 11, retrieval latency remains the same at approxi-
mately 0.46 ms across KG sizes ranging from 100 to 1000 nodes, indicat-
ing that query performance is eﬀectively constant with respect to graph 
growth. As noted in the methodology Section 3.3.1, the persisted trace 
count does not grow beyond this range because the system maintains a 
sliding-window, bounded graph rather than a full historical store. The 
combined cost of vocabulary classiﬁcation and trace reuse contributes 
an average latency of 2.5 s per query as shown in Fig. 10.
Additionally, pruning and diagnostic ﬁltering compressed stored 
traces to 1 KB, compared to 15 KB for raw observability logs (>90% re-
duction), conﬁrming the compactness of the observability memory rep-
resentation. While performance varies with domain size, database con-
ﬁguration, and model latency. Collectively, these results conﬁrm that 
Observability memory integration imposes minimal computational cost 
while improving execution eﬃciency through more targeted tool-use 
and trace-guided reasoning.
4.5.  Evaluating validation pipeline eﬃciency
The three-stage validation pipeline is evaluated using a student-
advising agent operating in an education domain as presented in the 
Demonstration Section 3.6. Stage 3 introduces a Human-in-the-Loop 
(HIL) review to ensure that only reliable traces are added to the observ-
ability memory. In this step, four evaluators with backgrounds in higher-
education advising and student-support services rated each processed 
trace including the user question, the agent’s intermediate reasoning 
steps, and the ﬁnal answer on a 1-5 quality scale. Inter-rater agreement 
was measured using Fleiss’ Kappa, yielding a value of 0.71, indicating 
substantial agreement. For each trace, the ﬁnal score was computed as 
the average of all four ratings, and traces below a preset threshold of 
3 were rejected. Disagreements were resolved via majority vote, with 
unresolved cases escalated to a ﬁfth adjudicator.
Each stage operates only on traces that were marked as successful by 
the previous one, producing a progressively smaller and more reliable 
candidate set. Because the objective is to prevent incorrect traces from 
entering the KG, the pipeline is designed to prioritize precision over 
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
10 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Fig. 10. Normalized computational eﬃciency of baseline agents versus their dual KG-augmented variants. Each subplot is normalized within model family, with 
raw values shown above bars.
Fig. 11. Retrieval latency of observability memory for node growth between 100–1000 nodes.
Table 6 
Confusion matrix across the three validation stages.
 Stage
 TP
 FP
 FN
 TN
 FDR
 Precision
 Root-Cause Analysis
 33
 12
 16
 39
 26.7%
 73.3%
 Knowledge Veriﬁcation
 18
 5
 15
 7
 21.7%
 78.3%
 Human Review
 17
 2
 1
 3
 10.5%
 89.5%
recall: reducing false positives(FP) is essential, while false negatives(FN) 
are acceptable since discarding uncertain traces is safer than retaining 
potentially incorrect ones.
To interpret the validation outcomes, we use a standard confusion-
matrix: True Positives (TP) denote valid traces correctly accepted, and 
True Negatives (TN) are invalid traces correctly rejected. False Positives 
(FP) represent invalid traces mistakenly accepted, whereas False Nega-
tives (FN) refer to valid traces incorrectly rejected. Two derived mea-
sures are central to evaluating ﬁltering eﬀectiveness: precision, the frac-
tion of accepted traces that are correct (Precision =
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃), and the false 
discovery rate (FDR), the fraction of accepted traces that are incorrect 
(FDR =
𝐹𝑃
𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑃). Lower FDR and higher precision indicate stronger ﬁl-
tering of erroneous traces.
As shown in Table 6, the three stages exhibit a clear improvement 
in these measures. Root-Cause Analysis provides broad initial ﬁlter-
ing; Knowledge-Based Veriﬁcation substantially reduces incorrect ac-
ceptances; and Human Review resolves the remaining ambiguous cases 
with the highest precision. This cascading procedure ensures that only 
traces with strong evidence of correctness progress through the pipeline.
5.  Conclusion
This paper presented a dual memory agent approach that integrates 
semantic knowledge with observability-driven execution traces to im-
prove factual and reasoning grounding, reducing hallucinations in Gen-
erative AI agents. Experimental results demonstrate that graph-based 
retrieval outperforms traditional vector-based approaches in hallucina-
tion mitigation. Likewise, observability-guided planning improves agent 
planning eﬃciency and robustness in complex reasoning tasks, reducing 
both faithfulness and factual hallucinations. Generative AI agents in this 
study are primarily text-based, for tasks such as code generation and API 
interaction. Extension to multimodal agent systems is planned as future 
work. Although ﬁne-tuning or architectural modiﬁcations may yield fur-
ther improvements, this work prioritizes in-context learning techniques 
such as prompt-based exemplars and retrieval-augmented generation for 
integrating historical planning ﬂows and responses due to interpretabil-
ity and ease of integration with pre-existing agents. Further develop-
ments of this work include advancing the shared vocabulary to reduce 
reliance on human-designed heuristics and improving robustness of se-
mantic memory by integrating generalized graph-retrieval techniques. 
Additional benchmark development is also needed to assess planning 
reuse, error recovery, and cross-task generalization within agent frame-
works.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Amali Matharaarachchi: Writing – original draft, Validation, 
Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis; Harsha Moraliyage:
Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Inves-
tigation; Nishan Mills: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodol-
ogy, Investigation, Formal analysis; Gihan Gamage: Writing – original 
draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization;
Daswin De Silva: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, 
Investigation, Conceptualization; Milos Manic: Writing – original draft, 
Supervision, Methodology, Investigation, Conceptualization.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
11 

A. Matharaarachchi et al.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgement
This work is supported by the Department of Climate Change, En-
ergy, the Environment and Water of the Australian Federal Government, 
as part of grant program ICIRN000077. 
References
[1] A. Zou, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Y. Qin, A resilient generative model in few-shot question 
answering, Knowl. Based Syst. (2025) 113629.
[2] D. De Silva, O. Kaynak, M. El-Ayoubi, N. Mills, D. Alahakoon, M. Manic, Opportuni-
ties and challenges of generative artiﬁcial intelligence: research, education, industry 
engagement, and social impact, IEEE Ind. Electron. Mag. (2024).
[3] M. Zaib, W.E. Zhang, Q.Z. Sheng, A. Mahmood, Y. Zhang, Conversational question 
answering: a survey, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 64 (12) (2022) 3151–3195.
[4] Z. Ji, N. Lee, R. Frieske, T. Yu, D. Su, Y. Xu, E. Ishii, Y.J. Bang, A. Madotto, P. Fung, 
Survey of hallucination in natural language generation, ACM Comput. Surv. 55 (12) 
(2023) 1–38.
[5] Y. Kim, H. Jeong, S. Chen, S.S. Li, M. Lu, K. Alhamoud, J. Mun, C. Grau, M. Jung, 
R. Gameiro, et al., Medical hallucinations in foundation models and their impact on 
healthcare, (2025). arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05777
[6] S.L. Mirtaheri, A. Pugliese, V. Pascucci, et al., Automated vulnerability score predic-
tion through lightweight generative AI, Knowl. Based Syst. (2025).
[7] M.-K. Ghali, A. Farrag, D. Won, Y. Jin, Enhancing knowledge retrieval with in-
context learning and semantic search through generative AI, Knowl. Based Syst. 
311 (2025) 113047.
[8] T. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Chang, S. Pei, N.V. Chawla, O. Wiest, X. Zhang, Large 
language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges, (2024). 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680
[9] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, E. Zhu, B. Li, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, C. 
Wang, Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation 
framework, 3 (4) (2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155
[10] B. Qiao, L. Li, X. Zhang, S. He, Y. Kang, C. Zhang, F. Yang, H. Dong, J. Zhang, 
L. Wang, M. Ma, P. Zhao, S. Qin, X. Qin, C. Du, Y. Xu, Q. Lin, S. Rajmohan, 
D. Zhang, TaskWeaver: A Code-First Agent Framework, (2023). arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2311.17541
[11] Microsoft, Semantic Kernel: Open-Source SDK for Building AI Agents, 2023. Ac-
cessed: 2025-07-09, https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel.
[12] G. Gamage, S. Kahawala, N. Mills, D. De Silva, M. Manic, D. Alahakoon, A. Jennings, 
Augmenting industrial chatbots in energy systems using chatgpt generative ai, in: 
2023 IEEE 32Nd International Symposium on Industrial Electronics (ISIE), IEEE, 
2023, pp. 1-6.
[13] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, 
Y. Lin, et al., A survey on large language model based autonomous agents, Front. 
Comput. Sci. 18 (6) (2024) 186345.
[14] L. Weng, LLM-powered Autonomous Agents, 2023. Blog post, https://lilianweng.
github.io/posts/2023-06-23-agent/.
[15] C. de Masson D’Autume, S. Ruder, L. Kong, D. Yogatama, Episodic memory in life-
long language learning, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 32 (2019).
[16] W. Wang, L. Dong, H. Cheng, X. Liu, X. Yan, J. Gao, F. Wei, Augmenting lan-
guage models with long-term memory, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 (2023) 
74530–74543.
[17] C. Shah, R.W. White, Agents are not enough, (2024). arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2412.16241
[18] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. Küttler, M. Lewis, 
W.-t. Yih, T. Rocktäschel, et al., Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-
intensive NLP tasks, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,  33, 
2020, pp. 9459–9474.
[19] B. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Bo, H. Shi, C. Hong, Y. Zhang, S. Tang, Graph retrieval-
augmented generation: A survey, (2024). arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921
[20] G. Agrawal, T. Kumarage, Z. Alghamdi, H. Liu, Can knowledge graphs reduce hal-
lucinations in llms?: A survey, (2023). arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07914
[21] L. Huang, W. Yu, W. Ma, W. Zhong, Z. Feng, H. Wang, Q. Chen, W. Peng, X. Feng, B. 
Qin, et al., A survey on hallucination in large language models: principles, taxonomy, 
challenges, and open questions, ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. 43 (2) (2025) 1–55.
[22] M. Research, GraphRAG: Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation, 2024, (https://
microsoft.github.io/graphrag/). Accessed: 2025-06-27.
[23] L. Sun, Z. Tao, Y. Li, H. Arakawa, Oda: Observation-driven agent for integrating llms 
and knowledge graphs, (2024). arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07677
[24] A. De Santis, M. Balduini, F. De Santis, A. Proia, A. Leo, M. Brambilla, E. Della Valle, 
Integrating large language models and knowledge graphs for extraction and valida-
tion of textual test data, in: International Semantic Web Conference, Springer, 2024, 
pp. 304–323.
[25] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, M. Podstawski, L. Gianinazzi, J. 
Gajda, T. Lehmann, H. Niewiadomski, P. Nyczyk, et al., Graph of thoughts: solv-
ing elaborate problems with large language models, in: Proceedings of the AAAI 
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 38, No. 16, 2024, pp. 17682–17690.
[26] D. Cheng, S. Huang, J. Bi, Y. Zhan, J. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Sun, F. Wei, D. Deng, Q. Zhang, 
Uprise: Universal prompt retrieval for improving zero-shot evaluation, (2023). arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2303.08518
[27] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, Y. Cao, React: synergizing 
reasoning and acting in language models, in: International Conference on Learning 
Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[28] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, S. Yao, Reﬂexion: language agents 
with verbal reinforcement learning, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems,  36, 2023, pp. 8634–8652.
[29] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, H.S.-R. Hajishirzi, learning to retrieve, gener-
ate, and critique through self-reﬂection. (2023). arXiv. 10.48550, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2310.11511
[30] T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, E. Hambro, L. Zettle-
moyer, N. Cancedda, T. Scialom, Toolformer: language models can teach themselves 
to use tools, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36 (2023) 68539–68551.
[31] A. Tamkin, M. McCain, K. Handa, E. Durmus, L. Lovitt, A. Rathi, S. Huang, A. Mount-
ﬁeld, J. Hong, S. Ritchie, et al., Clio: Privacy-Preserving Insights into Real-World AI 
Use, (2024). arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.13678
[32] S. Ji, S. Pan, E. Cambria, P. Marttinen, S.Y. Philip, A survey on knowledge graphs: 
representation, acquisition, and applications, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 
33 (2) (2021) 494–514.
[33] A.I. Conﬁdent, DeepEval: The Open-Source LLM Evaluation Framework, 
2025, (https://deepeval.com). Version 1.0.0. Available at https://github.com/
conﬁdent-ai/deepeval.
[34] Z. Yang, P. Qi, S. Zhang, Y. Bengio, W.W. Cohen, R. Salakhutdinov, C.D. Manning, 
HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering, (2018). 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600
[35] LangChain Technologies, LangSmith: A Platform for LLM Application Evaluation 
and Observability, 2023. https://smith.langchain.com.
[36] Neo4j,  Inc., Neo4j Aura: Fully Managed Graph Database as a Service, 2020, https:
//neo4j.com/cloud/aura.
[37] S. Sivasubramaniam, C. Osei-Akoto, Y. Zhang, K. Stockinger, J. Fuerst, SM3-Text-
to-Query: Synthetic Multi-Model Medical Text-to-Query Benchmark, 2024, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2411.05521. 2411.05521
[38] J. Walonoski, M. Kramer, J. Nichols, A. Quina, C. Moesel, D. Hall, C. Duﬀett, K. Dube, 
T. Gallagher, S. McLachlan, Synthea: an approach, method, and software mechanism 
for generating synthetic patients and the synthetic electronic health care record, J. 
Am. Med. Inf. Assoc. 25 (3) (2018) 230–238.
[39] GPTechday, OpenAI Academy Knowledge Graph Recipe, 2025, (https://github.
com/gptechday/openai-academy-kg-recipe). Accessed: 2025-06-29.
[40] OpenAI, GPT-4o Technical Report, 2024, (https://openai.com/research/gpt-4o). 
Accessed: 2025-06-28.
Knowledge-Based Systems 338 (2026) 115469 
12 
