MAMHSAN: A multi-agent deep reinforcement learning framework based 
on multi-head self-attention network with heterogeneous graph embedding 
for flexible job shop scheduling☆
Zi-Qi Zhang a,b,c,1,*, Tong Huang a,b,1, Bin Qian a,b,c,**
,  
Rong Hu a,b
a School of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China
b The Higher Educational Key Laboratory for Industrial Intelligence and Systems of Yunnan Province, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, 
China
c Yunnan Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Flexible job shop scheduling
Multi-agent reinforcement learning
Deep reinforcement learning
Heterogeneous graph
Multi-head self-attention network
A B S T R A C T
Industrial intelligence serves as a crucial role in advancing smart manufacturing, with flexible manufacturing 
systems (FMS) emerging as a predominant production paradigm. This article introduces a novel multi-agent deep 
reinforcement learning framework to tackle the flexible job shop scheduling problem (FJSP). To overcome the 
limitations in existing Markov decision process (MDP)-based models for FJSPs, we introduce a novel multi- 
dimensional action and reward MDP (MD-MDP) formulation. Building upon this foundation, we develop an 
innovative multi-agent reinforcement learning framework (MAMHSAN) that integrates multi-head self-attention 
network (MHSAN) with the heterogeneous graph embedding used to solve FJSPs. In MAMHSAN, agents inde­
pendently make decisions in multidimensional actions, tackling challenges related to machine selection and 
operation sequencing. The integration of the MHSAN with the heterogeneous graph representation significantly 
improves feature extraction efficacy and decision-making efficiency by capturing critical correlations among 
operations and machines. Furthermore, a multi-agent proximal policy optimization (MA-PPO) algorithm is 
proposed for trial-and-error training and feedback optimizing parameters of MAMHSAN, further enhancing 
collaborative decision-making capabilities for agents. Extensive experiments and comprehensive comparisons 
demonstrate MAMHSAN’s effectiveness and computational efficiency, with statistical analyses demonstrating the 
efficacy of each critical component of our method and the significant superiority of the proposed MAMHSAN 
over state-of-the-art algorithms for solving FJSPs.
1. Introduction
Industrial intelligence-driven smart manufacturing is transforming 
modern manufacturing systems, where industrial IoT-enhanced flexible 
manufacturing systems (FMS), through their capabilities for real-time 
responsiveness and dynamic adaptability, are emerging as a pivotal 
paradigm for achieving intelligent scheduling and collaborative 
decision-making (Yang et al., 2021). Such advancements bridge the gap 
between massive production and customized production, significantly 
enhancing the agility of enterprises to respond to changes in market 
dynamics. A critical challenge in implementing FMS is to address the 
flexible job shop scheduling problem (FJSP), a well-known NP-hard 
problem (Xie et al., 2019) that remains a central research focus in 
intelligent scheduling research. The FJSP involves selecting appropriate 
machines for operations and determining superior sequences for these 
operations, thereby significantly increasing its complexity (Li et al., 
2022; Xie et al., 2019). This critical challenge is commonly encountered 
across industries including semiconductor fabrication, petrochemical 
sectors, and motive manufacturing (Wang & Zhang, 2023; Wu et al., 
2022; Zhang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2025). Due to the potential for 
☆This article is part of a special issue entitled: ‘AI-based Approaches’ published in Computers & Industrial Engineering.
* Corresponding author at: School of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China.
** Corresponding author at: School of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China.
E-mail addresses: zhangziqi@kust.edu.cn (Z.-Q. Zhang), huangtong@stu.kust.edu.cn (T. Huang), bin.qian@kust.edu.cn (B. Qian), ronghu_da@kust.edu.cn (R. Hu). 
1 The authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Industrial Engineering
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/caie
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2025.111466
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
Available online 13 August 2025 
0360-8352/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

significant applications in computer-integrated manufacturing and in­
dustrial engineering, studies on FJSPs and their solving methods are of 
great interest in both academic and industrial domains.
Previous studies have classified methods for solving FJSPs into exact 
and approximate approaches. Among the exact methods, mathematical 
programming represents the most representative technique (Meng et al., 
2019), accurately modeling the problem and systematically exploring 
the solution space through rigorous mathematical formulations. These 
MILP methods guarantee optimal solutions for small-scale instances but 
suffer from a combinatorial explosion when dealing with large-scale 
FJSPs due to inherent complexity, rendering high-quality and timely 
solutions infeasible (Meng et al., 2020). Consequently, approximate 
methods are predominantly adopted for practical applications, 
including heuristic and metaheuristic algorithms. Heuristic algorithms 
quickly generate approximate solutions by formulating rules and search 
strategies based on job/operation prioritization, yet their randomness 
may compromise solution optimality. Metaheuristic algorithms, 
conversely, iteratively refine initial solutions toward high-quality op­
tima. Despite their efficacy, these approaches demand considerable 
computational costs and resources, exhibit limited generalization ca­
pabilities for large-scale FJSPs, and are prone to premature convergence 
at local optima (Sharma & Tripathi, 2022). Thus, developing effective 
and efficient approaches that balance solution quality with computa­
tional efficiency persists as an unresolved challenge in addressing FJSPs.
Recent research has witnessed that deep reinforcement learning 
(DRL) has emerged as a promising learning-based framework within 
intelligent optimal scheduling domains. DRL-based methods have 
demonstrated significant effectiveness in solving complex optimization 
problems and have also been widely applied in addressing FJSPs (Cunha 
et al., 2018). These techniques involve modeling the scheduling process 
of FJSPs as a Markov decision process (MDP), which generates superior 
solutions from end to end by treating state features as inputs and 
determining appropriate actions through agents. Notably, DRL-based 
methods for FJSPs learn effective policies for decisions directly from 
problem-specific features without predefining priority dispatching rules 
(PDRs). Upon integrating deep neural networks (DNNs) with RL tech­
niques, DRL-based methods have shown strong strengths in solving 
various extensions of FJSPs (Zhao et al., 2021). Existing works reveal 
that the critical aspect of DRL-based methods lies in the inputs from state 
representations that consist of state features designed based on problem- 
specific knowledge (Liu et al., 2022; Luo, 2020). However, as the 
complexity of the problem increases, the finite number of scheduling 
states and feature representations are inadequate for comprehensively 
capturing environmental dynamics. As a result, the feature representa­
tions and feedback rewards between agents from interactions always 
suffer from trial-and-error experiences, which compromises policy 
adaptability and learning effects in dynamic environments.
Recent advancements have motivated some scholars to dynamically 
capture both scheduling states and feature representations in MDPs by 
graph-based modeling. Among these approaches, disjunctive graph and 
heterogeneous graph formulations have emerged as notable techniques 
for representing the feature states at various time steps in MDPs for 
FJSPs, with the introduction of these states into graph neural networks 
(GNNs) (Wu et al., 2021) for extracting problem-specific characteristics. 
This allows efficient representation of complex relationships between 
operations and machines through nodes and directed arcs, capturing 
rich potential information from the environment for agents to make 
decisions. Heterogeneous graphs introduce machine nodes with undi­
rected arcs to illustrate inherent connections among operations and 
machines, greatly reducing the complexity of graph structures and 
providing an intuitive allocation relationship between operations and 
machines compared to disjunctive graphs. However, due to the 
complexity of FJSPs, discursive and heterogeneous graphs exhibit 
exponential growth in the density of graphs as scheduling process pro­
ceeds or problem scale increases. This leads to a sharp increase in the 
computational cost of GNN-based feature extraction when extracting 
graph features in MDPs. Furthermore, in practical scenarios, the scale of 
FJSP varies, making it challenging for GNNs optimized for specific scales 
to adapt to different sizes of FJSPs, thus resulting in limited general­
ization ability of final solutions’ performance (Munikoti et al., 2024). 
Consequently, designing effective GNNs to extract problem-specific 
characteristics, balancing computational efficiency with scale adapt­
ability, and handling different scales of FJSPs, remains a significant 
research challenge.
Motivated by these observations, we propose an innovative multi- 
agent DRL framework based on multi-head self-attention network 
(MHSAN) and the heterogeneous graph embedding (MAMHSAN) tech­
nique for solving the FJSP. In MAMHSAN, we innovatively integrate the 
heterogeneous graph representation with the multi-head self-attention 
network (MHSAN) via feature embedding technique, which enables 
efficient cross-scale feature extraction through concatenation opera­
tions. Furthermore, a novel multi-dimensional action-reward MDP (MD- 
MDP) formulation is introduced to overcome limitations of conventional 
modeling methods. Based on MD-MDP, MAMHSAN uses both decision- 
time transfer (DDT) and scheduling action selection (SAS) agents to 
make collaborative decisions: the DDT agent is responsible for deter­
mining optimal decision time transfer, thus enabling the SAS agent to 
always make the best-fit choice in potential action spaces. Under such 
joint decision-making enabled by MD-MDP modeling, the scheduling 
solution quality of FJSP is significantly improved. The notable contri­
butions can be summarized as follows: 
• A novel MD-MDP modeling paradigm is introduced for FJSP, which 
shows strengths in terms of action space selection efficiency and state 
feature extraction effectiveness against previous DRL-based 
methods. In MD-MDP, comprehensive action space consideration, 
reasonable reward mechanisms, and state transitions enable 
MAMHSAN to have robust decision-making capabilities, thereby 
improving the performance of MD-MDP for solving FJSPs.
• The framework of multi-agent MHSAN (MAMHSAN) with hetero­
geneous graph embedding is proposed for FJSP. In MAMHSAN, dual 
DDT and SAS agents derive the optimal actions through interactive 
feedback and collaboration, thus achieving efficient joint decision- 
making. Meanwhile, fine-grained reward shaping and experience 
sharing fasten training convergence while preserving policy 
optimality.
• A novel heterogeneous GNN (HGNN) based on a heterogeneous 
graph embedding technique with the MHSAN is developed, 
providing a promising perspective for state representation and 
feature extraction in MDPs for tackling FJSPs. These designed state 
features are well-suited to the characteristics of FJSPs, enabling 
agents to effectively capture critical scheduling states and enhance 
decision-making efficiency.
• An improved multi-agent proximal policy optimization (MA-PPO) 
algorithm is proposed for training MAMHSAN. Based on the rewards 
received by DDT and SAS agents for performing actions, MA-PPO is 
effectively optimized for MAMHSAN, exhibiting the effectiveness 
and robust stability on validation benchmarks in computational 
experiments.
• Computational comparisons and comprehensive evaluations across 
four benchmark datasets confirm MAMHSAN’s statistically signifi­
cant superiority over both the composite priority dispatching rules 
(PDRs) and the state-of-the-art approaches in diverse scales and 
scenarios.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, related 
works are reviewed, focusing on current advances of approximation 
techniques for solving FJSPs. Section 3 provides an overview of the 
formulation and representation of heterogeneous graphs related to the 
FJSP. In Section 4, we evaluate existing modeling approaches catego­
rized as MDPs for FJSPs, and introduce an innovative MD-MDP 
modeling method, along with state embedding of MHSAN based on 
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
2 

heterogeneous graphs, a hierarchical decision-making framework of 
MAMHSAN, and training details of the MA-PPO algorithm. Compre­
hensive experimental results and statistical analyses across different 
benchmark instances and scenarios are presented in Section 5. Section 6
outlines insightful findings, conclusions, and suggestions for future 
research.
2. Literature review
2.1. Related work on FJSPs
Research on solution approaches for the FJSP involves tackling two 
primary subproblems: 1) identifying eligible processing machines for 
each operation of jobs, and 2) determining the processing orders of 
operations on machines. Unlike the classic JSP, the FJSP relaxes the 
constraints on machines, allowing each operation of jobs to be processed 
on multiple machines, thereby making the FJSP more complex and 
challenging. Existing methods for solving the FJSP and its variants are 
mainly classified into two categories: exact methods and approximate 
methods (Xie et al., 2019). Exact algorithms involve the mathematical 
modeling of the FJSPs, including mixed-integer linear programming 
(MILP) (Meng et al., 2019), and employ mathematical programming 
methods to find optimal solutions. Demir and Kürs¸at ˙Is¸leyen (2013)
proposed five mathematical models aimed at modeling FJSP and pre­
sented the MILP model to minimize the makespan. Gran et al. (2015)
developed an MILP model designed to minimize the makespan and the 
total processing time, and this model demonstrated effectiveness for 
small-scale instances of FJSP. Meng et al. (2019) investigated MILP 
models for energy-efficient FJSP, implementing a turning off/on strat­
egy to reduce idle energy consumption. They introduced six MILP 
models and conducted a comprehensive comparison with existing ap­
proaches, showing the superiority of their formulations. Naderi and 
Roshanaei (2022) exploited the decomposable structural features and 
developed an efficient constraint programming logic-based Benders 
decomposition (CP-LBBD) technique that integrates the strengths of 
MILP and CP models. While these exact algorithms are designed to 
discover optimal solutions by thoroughly examining candidate solutions 
and achieve excellent results for small-scale problems, their computa­
tional complexity escalates exponentially as the problem size increases, 
limiting their applicability (Meng et al., 2020).
In contrast, approximation methods include heuristics and meta­
heuristics, with emerging efforts that have confirmed these approaches 
can obtain satisfactory solutions. For solving FJSPs, heuristics 
commonly utilize composite PDRs which specific rules are formulated 
for the sequencing of operations and the allocation of machines, 
enabling the construction of feasible solutions. Regarding the PDRs for 
sequencing operations (Chiang & Fu, 2007; Doh et al., 2013; Narassima 
et al., 2022; Sobeyko & M¨onch, 2016; Thenarasu et al., 2022), these 
rules include the most remaining operation priority rule (MOPNR), most 
workload priority rule (MWKR), and first-in-first-out rule (FIFO). 
Regarding the PDRs for machine allocation (Doh et al., 2013), usually 
used rules such as the shortest processing time (SPT), the longest pro­
cessing time (LPT), and the earliest end time (EET). Although heuristic 
techniques can rapidly generate near-optimal solutions, they primarily 
depend on predefined priority rules and search strategies; thus, they 
exhibit inherent randomness and adaptability but offer no guarantee of 
optimality. The primary strength of these heuristics lies in their 
computational efficiency (Haupt, 1989; Sobeyko & M¨onch, 2016; The­
narasu et al., 2022); however, their reliance on predefined priority rules, 
without sufficiently incorporating problem-specific knowledge and 
characteristics of FJSPs, often results in convergence to local optima. 
Metaheuristics derive suitable solutions by integrating diverse strategies 
and heuristics to iteratively improve the quality of solutions through 
evolutionary search mechanisms with problem-specific knowledge 
(Sharma & Tripathi, 2022; Zhang et al., 2024b). Rooyani and Defersha 
(2019) proposed a two-stage genetic algorithm (2SGA) for solving large- 
scale instances of the FJSP. Caldeira and Gnanavelbabu (2019) devised 
an improved Jaya algorithm (IJA) incorporating effective initialization 
methods, local search strategies, and acceptance criteria to improve 
solution quality while preserving population diversity. Yang et al. 
(2022) introduced an improved Dragonfly algorithm incorporating a 
dynamic opposition-based learning (DOL) strategy for large-scale FJSP. 
Luo et al. (2023) proposed a Pareto-based two-stage evolutionary al­
gorithm (PTEA) to efficiently address the FJSP with worker cooperation 
flexibility. Sun et al. (2023) proposed an improved hybrid genetic al­
gorithm with variable neighborhood search (HGA-VNS) to tackle the 
FJSP, considering machine workload balancing while minimizing 
makespan. Yang et al. (2023) proposed a guided shuffled frog-leaping 
algorithm (GSFLA) to minimize the makespan of FJSP with variable 
sublots and overlapping operations. Xu et al. (2024) proposed a hybrid 
QPSO-VNS integrating quantum PSO (QPSO) and VNS to address FJSP. 
Han et al. (2024) proposed a dual population collaborative GA (DCGA) 
for the FJSP considering automatic guided vehicles (AGVs) trans­
portation with the objective of minimizing makespan. Han and Gong 
(2025) devised a memetic algorithm based on non-dominated levels 
(MANL) for the FJSP with learn-forgetting effects and worker coopera­
tion, aiming to minimize both makespan and worker workload. 
Although these metaheuristics are well-suited for addressing FJSPs with 
complex constraints across various scenarios, they typically require 
considerable computational costs for large-scale FJSPs and frequently 
converge to local optima with limited escape capabilities.
Recently, the successful application of DRL has introduced a prom­
ising perspective for addressing FJSPs (Panzer & Bender, 2022; Zhang 
et al., 2023c). By integrating the perceptual strengths of deep learning 
(LeCun et al., 2015) with the sequential decision-making framework of 
RL (Sutton & Barto, 2018), DRL-based methods have demonstrated 
significant efficacy in solving various combinatorial optimization 
problems (COPs). Compared to metaheuristics, DRL-based methods 
possess a notable advantage: the ability to dynamically adapt optimal 
actions (dispatching rules) at sequential decision points. These methods 
demonstrate enhanced effectiveness in reducing production costs, 
improving processing efficiency, and exhibiting superior flexibility and 
generalization capabilities (Li et al., 2023).
2.2. DRL-based methods for FJSPs
Recent years have witnessed significant research on learning-based 
methods for tackling FJSPs. Among these, DRL-based methods have 
emerged as prominent paradigms, effectively combining the strengths of 
DNNs and RL (Mnih et al., 2015). The demonstrated success of these 
methods across diverse domains has motivated extensive exploration 
into their application for solving various FJSPs (Cunha et al., 2020). 
DRL-based methods first formulate the FJSP as MDP, and then agents 
perceive information about production environments as state inputs by a 
DNN models that output priorities for feasible scheduling operations, 
thereby establishing end-to-end learning-based frameworks. Through 
training on production process datasets, the DNN model learns to 
adaptively select optimal actions in specific states to maximize total 
rewards relevant to optimization objectives. These methods focus on 
modeling FJSPs as MDPs and efficiently extracting feature states from 
environments, and scheduling strategies are learned directly from state 
inputs without relying on predefined PDRs. Moreover, DRL-based 
methods with well-trained DNN models deliver superior solutions 
across problem scales within acceptable timeframes and exhibit strong 
generalization capabilities (Lei et al., 2022; Song et al., 2023; Yuan 
et al., 2024). Due to advantages like rapid solving speed and strong 
generalization, several scholars are increasingly interested in solving 
FJSPs by applying DRL-based methods.
There are critical challenges in applying DRL-based methods to 
FJSPs, including effective MDP modeling, state representation, and 
feature extraction. Earlier efforts typically designed states based on 
process parameters and implemented with DRL frameworks to tackle 
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
3 

FJSPs. Luo (2020) proposed a deep Q-network (DQN) based method for 
dynamic FJSP (DFJSP) considering new job insertions, defining seven 
state features characterizing machine and job utilization, and delay rates 
to facilitate informed DQN decisions. Subsequently, Luo et al. (2022)
introduced a hierarchical multi-agent DRL-based method for real-time 
scheduling of dynamic partial-no-wait multi-objective FJSP with new 
job insertions and machine breakdowns. They developed 20 features 
related to aspects such as machine and job utilization, and operation 
completion rate for effective DQN decision-making. Liu et al. (2022)
presented a hierarchical distributed DRL-based method for FJSP with 
random job arrivals, in which three specific features are defined for 
distinct job sets to enable double DQN (DDQN) agent decisions. Liu et al. 
(2023) proposed a multi-agent DRL solver for dynamic FJSP (DFJSP), 
which designed five features for candidate jobs based on processing and 
waiting times, and fed these features into DDQN for near real-time 
scheduling decisions. While above studies achieved notable success for 
FJSPs, the generalization capability of these methods often requires 
researchers to have insights into problem-specific knowledge and 
domain expertise. The definitions of features are limited to specific as­
pects of jobs or machines and may not adequately capture the charac­
teristics of the environments.
To capture high-quality state features from scheduling environ­
ments, recent interests increasingly tend to attempt feature extraction by 
GNNs (Wu et al., 2021). Significant efforts leverage disjunctive graph 
representations. Zhang et al. (2020) developed a DRL-based method that 
combines DRL and GNN for the JSP, modeling states as disjunctive 
graphs and encoding state graphs by GNNs. Park et al. (2021) proposed a 
similar DRL-based JSP solver, utilizing richer node features while 
explicitly accounting for heterogeneous node relationships during 
message passing. Zeng et al. (2022) proposed a DRL-based method for 
FJSP, which represents scheduling states via disjunctive graphs and 
extracts state features from graphs via GNNs for efficient decision 
making among agents. Lei et al. (2022) introduced an end-to-end DRL 
framework that employs disjunctive graphs for state representations and 
utilizes multi-pointer graph networks (MPGN) to process the structural 
information of disjunction graphs. They trained operation selection and 
machine allocation strategies using multiple proximal policy optimiza­
tion (PPO) algorithms. Zhang et al. (2023a) proposed a two-stage DRL- 
based method for dynamic FJSP (DFJSP) with variable processing times 
(FJSP-VPT), utilizing dynamic scheduling experience, representing 
scheduling states via disjunctive graphs, and applying the GNNs for 
feature extraction. Lei et al. (2024) proposed a hierarchical DRL 
framework based on disjunctive graphs to address DFJSP with unpre­
dictable job arrivals, where an upper-layer agent decomposes DFJSP 
into multiple FJSPs and a lower-layer agent learns scheduling strategies 
for FJSPs via GNNs. Yuan et al. (2024) proposed a novel DRL framework 
to achieve representation learning and policy learning for FJSP, which 
represented the states by disjunctive graphs and used a lightweight 
multilayer perceptron (MLP) for state embedding. These studies effec­
tively solve FJSPs by combining GNNs’ strength in modeling complex 
graph structures with DRL’s powerful feature perception and decision- 
making capabilities. Notably, the global states of FJSPs include both 
operation and machine scheduling states; however, disjunctive graph 
representations are inherently limited to operation nodes, omitting 
explicit machine node representations (Munikoti et al., 2024). Conse­
quently, typical GNNs primarily focus on operation node features while 
ignoring machine node features when processing these graphs. This 
limitation impacts the training of scheduling strategies to effectively 
optimize machine utilization and appropriately assign available ma­
chines to operations.
As research progresses, research hotspots focus on using heteroge­
neous graphs to represent state features for FJSPs. Song et al. (2023)
proposed a novel scheduling state heterogeneous representation method 
based on heterogeneous GNN (HGNN) as a state embedding network to 
describe the complex relationships between operations and machines. 
Wan et al. (2024) developed an end-to-end DRL framework that com­
bines a meta-path-based HGNN (MHGNN), which enables heterogeneous 
graphs to manage multiple types of nodes, greatly reducing the graph’s 
density and effectively lowering both computational and storage costs. 
Nevertheless, whether considering homogeneous or heterogeneous 
graphs, increasing problem size causes the complexity and density of the 
graphs to rise rapidly, thus hindering efficient scheduling state feature 
extraction. Recent advances have highlighted the potential of repre­
sentation learning techniques, such as GNNs (Wu et al., 2020) and 
attention mechanisms (Vaswani et al., 2017), in capturing inherent 
structures of COPs with complex constraints. Chen et al. (2023) pre­
sented a novel DRL framework utilizing an attention mechanism and 
disjunctive graph embedding, which has shown effectiveness in solving 
large-scale JSP. Yuan et al. (2024) proposed an end-to-end DRL frame­
work for FJSP. They designed a dual attention network (DAN), featuring 
multiple interconnected attention blocks for operation and machine 
information, serving as state embedding network to extract feature de­
tails. Zhang et al. (2024a) proposed a collaborative agent RL (CARL) 
framework for FJSP. In CARL, graph attention networks (GATs) are 
Table 1 
Survey of DRL-based methods for solving FJSPs.
Author(s)
Graph 
representation
Embedding 
network
Objective
Problem
Description
Zeng et al. 
(2022)
Disjunction Graph
GNN
Makespan
FJSP
A DRL framework with GNN based on a disjunctive graph for FJSP.
Lei et al. (2022)
Disjunction Graph
MPGN
Makespan
FJSP
An end-to-end DRL framework with MPGN based on a disjunctive graph for FJSP.
Zhang et al. 
(2023a)
Disjunction Graph
GNN
Makespan
FJSP- 
VPT
A two-stage DRL dynamic scheduling framework with GNN based on a disjunctive graph 
for VPT-FJSP.
Lei et al. (2024)
Disjunction Graph
GNN
Makespan
DFJSP
A novel end-to-end hierarchical RL framework with GNN based on a disjunctive graph 
for DFJSP with random job arrivals.
Yuan et al. 
(2024)
Disjunction Graph
DNN
Makespan
FJSP
A DRL framework with a DNN based on a disjunctive graph for FJSP.
Zhang et al. 
(2024a)
Disjunction Graph
GAT, TE
Makespan
FJSP
A CARL framework with GAT and TE methods based on a disjunctive graph for FJSP.
Yuan et al. 
(2024)
Disjunction Graph
DAN
Makespan
FJSP
An end-to-end DRL framework with DAN methods based on a disjunctive graph for FJSP.
Song et al. 
(2023)
Heterogeneous 
Graph
HGNN
Makespan
FJSP
A novel DRL framework with HGNN based on heterogeneous graphs for FJSP.
Wan et al. 
(2024)
Heterogeneous 
Graph
MHGNN
Makespan
FJSP
An end-to-end DRL framework with MHGNN based on heterogeneous graphs for large- 
scale FJSP.
Wan et al. 
(2025)
Heterogeneous 
Graph
IGAT
Makespan
FJSP
A MAGRL framework with the IGAT method based on heterogeneous graphs for FJSP.
Ours
Heterogeneous 
Graph
MHSAN
Makespan
FJSP
A multi-agent DRL framework with MHSAN based on heterogeneous graphs for FJSP.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
4 

adopted to extract the global states from disjunctive graphs, and a 
transformer encoder (TE) is used to capture competitive relationships 
among machines. Wan et al. (2025) proposed a multi-agent-based graph 
RL (MAGRL) framework to effectively solve FJSP. In MAGRL, state 
features are extracted via improved GAT (IGAT) based on heterogeneous 
graph representations. Table 1 summarizes recent research on solving 
FJSPs by DRL-based methods with diverse graph embedding networks.
Current research trends emphasize enhancing graph structures and 
employing advanced GNNs to extract meaningful information from 
complex FJSPs. However, inherent complexity of FJSPs implies that 
even representing states using heterogeneous graphs encounters signif­
icant challenges with large-scale instances, where both graph density 
and complexity rise sharply. Moreover, existing research has mainly 
emphasized state feature extraction techniques, with limited investiga­
tion of formulating FJSPs as suitable MDPs adapted to the problem 
characteristics. It is crucial to establish sound MDPs for DRL-based 
methods, which may affect the efficiency and effectiveness of gener­
ating solutions from end-to-end DRL frameworks. Therefore, this study 
introduces a novel feature extraction method employing heterogeneous 
graph-based MHSAN to perform multiple feature embeddings, yielding 
rich and informative representations for FJSPs. This multi-agent DRL 
framework, based on MHSAN with heterogeneous graph embedding, 
effectively handles FJSPs across scales while showing state-of-the-art 
superiority. Furthermore, we investigate the modeling of FJSPs as the 
MD-MDP, providing promising perspectives for designing rational and 
efficient methods for modeling MDPs. Building on these, our proposed 
multi-agent DRL framework (MAMHSAN) exhibits excellent efficacy in 
solving FJSPs, as detailed and validated in the following sections.
3. Preliminaries and problem formulation
3.1. Description of FJSP
For efficient implementation of FMS, the production process is 
typically modeled as a FJSP (Xie et al., 2019). The FJSP can be defined as 
follows. There is a set of jobs J = {J1, J2, ..., Jn} processed in the job shop 
that contains multiple machines M = {M1, M2, ..., Mm} and each job Ji 
consists of ni operations, i.e., O i =
{
Oi,1, Oi,2, ..., Oi,ni
}
. These operations 
must be processed in predefined sequential order, meaning that the 
subsequent operation Oi,j can only commence once the preceding 
operation Oi,j−1 has been completed. The flexible production reflects 
that machine available for processing can be selected and adapted to suit 
specific situations for different operations. Each operation Oi,j requires 
assignment to a processing machine from a set of eligible machines 
Mi,j ∈M, whereas each machine Mk processes at most one operation 
simultaneously. FJSP involves assigning appropriate processing ma­
chines for operations and determining processing sequences of opera­
tions on machines. Some assumptions include: 1) All jobs and machines 
are available at the initial moment; 2) Transport time between opera­
tions is negligible; and 3) Once a machine starts processing an operation, 
it is not allowed to be interrupted. Notation definitions are summarized 
in Table 2. Following the problem description and definition of nota­
tions, the mathematical model is expressed in Eqs. (1)-(7). 
Bi,j⩾0, ∀Oi,j ∈O
(1) 
∑
m
k=1
Xi,j,k = 1, ∀Oi,j ∈O
(2) 
∑
m
k=1
∑
n
i=1
∑
ni
j=1
Xi,j,k =
∑
n
i=1
ni
(3) 
Bi,j +
∑
Mk∈Mi,j
PTi,j,kXi,j,k⩽Bi,j+1, ∀Oi,j ∈O
(4) 
Bi,j + PTi,j,kXi,j,k⩽Biʹ,jʹ + L
(
3 −Yi,j,iʹ,jʹ −Xi,j,k −Xiʹ,jʹ,k
)
,
∀Oi,j ∈O , Oiʹ,jʹ ∈O , Mk ∈Mi,j ∩Miʹ,jʹ
(5) 
Biʹ,jʹ + PTiʹ,jʹ,k⩽Bi,j + L
(
2 + Yi,j,iʹ,jʹ −Xi,j,k −Xiʹ,jʹ,k
)
, ∀Oi,j ∈O , Oiʹ,jʹ ∈O , Mk
∈Mi,j ∩Miʹ,jʹ
(6) 
Cmax⩾Bi,ni +
∑
Mk∈Mi,ni
(PTi,ni,kXi,ni,k), ∀Ji ∈J
(7) 
Eq. (1) ensures processing times of all operations must be greater 
than or equal to the initial time. Eq. (2) indicates that any operation can 
only be executed on one machine. Eq. (3) indicates that each operation 
must be assigned to a specific processing machine. Eq. (4) shows that for 
all operations of the same job Ji, the next operation Oi,j can be started 
only after the completion of its preceding operation Oi,j−1. Eq. (5) and (6)
indicates that for different operations executed on the same machine, 
the subsequent operation Oi,j can only begin once the previous operation 
Oiʹ,jʹ has been completed. The goal of FJSP is to reduce the overall 
completion time for all operations which means minimizing the make­
span (Cmax), with constraints satisfying Eq. (7).
3.2. Heterogeneous graph representation of FJSP
Previous studies commonly utilized disjunction graphs to represent 
scheduling schemes of FJSPs. However, as the size of problems in­
creases, these graphs may become increasingly complex, resulting in 
dense graph structures. Thus, extracting meaningful information may 
pose considerable challenges (Munikoti et al., 2024). To overcome these 
limitations, researchers have enhanced disjunction graphs using het­
erogeneous graphs to represent scheduling schemes of FJSPs (Song 
et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2024, 2025). The heterogeneous graph is defined 
as a quadruple G = (P , M , D , U ), where P denotes operation nodes 
and M signifies machine nodes. The set D consists of directed arcs that 
establish each path connecting virtual start (S) to end (E) nodes, illus­
trating sequential constraints between operations for each job. The set 
U comprises undirected arcs that link operation node (P ) to machine 
node (M ), indicating that specific operations can be executed on eligible 
machines. Heterogeneous graph incorporates two types of nodes (i.e., P 
and M ), with distinct properties, as well as two types of edges (i.e., D 
Table 2 
The description of the symbols for FJSP.
Notation
Description
Indices
​
i,iʹ
Index for jobs, i.e., i,iʹ = 1,2,...,n.
j,jʹ
Index for operations of job, i.e., j,jʹ = 1,2,...,ni.
k
Index for machines, i.e., k = 1,2,...,m.
Constant
​
n
Total number of jobs.
ni
The number of operations belonging to job Ji.
m
Total number of machines.
L
A sufficiently large positive number.
PTi,j,k
The processing time of Oi,j on machine Mk.
Sets
​
J
Set of jobs, i.e., J = {J1,J2,...,Jn}.
M
Set of machines, i.e., M = {M1,M2,...,Mm}.
Mi,j
The optional machine set for operation Oi,j.
O
Set of all operations.
O i
Set of operations for job Ji, i.e., O i =
{
Oi,1, Oi,2, ..., Oi,ni
}
.
O ʹ
The collection of all current operations to be processed.
H k
Set of adjacent nodes of machine Mk in graph structure.
Variable
​
Oi,ci
Currently waiting for scheduling operation of job Ji.
Bi,j
The start time of operation Oi,j.
Xi,j,k
Xi,j,k =
{
1, if Oi,j selects processing machine Mk
0, otherwise.
Yi,j,iʹ,jʹ
Yi,j,iʹ,jʹ =
{
1, if Oi,j is a predecessor of Oiʹ,jʹ
0, otherwise.
,i < iʹ
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
5 

and U ), which represents different characteristics, forming a quadruple 
that forms a complete heterogeneous graph. Fig. 1 illustrates a 3 × 3 
scale instance of FJSP via heterogeneous graph representation. Notably, 
representing scheduling schemes of FJSPs by the heterogeneous graph 
effectively adapts multiple node types. By adding undirected arcs U 
between corresponding nodes after assigning one operation on a ma­
chine, this representation greatly reduces graph density, thereby 
lowering computational costs and storage costs while enhancing infor­
mation extraction efficiency (Wu et al., 2021).
3.3. Multi-head self-attention network
The multi-head self-attention network (MHSAN) comprises multiple 
single-head self-attention networks (SHSAN) (Vaswani et al., 2017), 
which has inherent strength of being compatible with sequential inputs 
of arbitrary length without any changes to network architecture. For any 
layer processing input X ∈ℝT×din(where T denotes sequence length and 
din input dimension), we first project it to query (q), key (k), and value 
(v) vectors via learnable weight matrices Wq, Wk, and Wv (Wq ∈ℝdin×dk, 
Wk ∈ℝdin×dk, and Wv ∈ℝdin×dv). Then, based on attention weights 
derived from q and k, enabling weighted aggregation of v to obtain the 
outputs, as formalized in Eq. (8). For the lʹ−th layer, the calculation 
method of outputs is shown in Eq. (9), which depends on the learnable 
weight parameters of the lʹ−th layer, i.e., Wlʹ
q, Wlʹ
k, and Wlʹ
v. Finally, 
concatenating the outputs of all layers yields the final results after 
passing through MHSAN, as shown in Eq. (10). 
Attension(q, k, v) = Softmax
(qk⊤
̅̅̅̅
dk
√
)
v
(8) 
headlʹ = Attension(XWlʹ
q, XWlʹ
k, XWlʹ
v)
(9) 
MHSAN(X, Wq, Wk, Wv) = [head1, head2, …, headl]
(10) 
Recent research for FJSPs through DRL-based methods, scholars 
have introduced the concept of heterogeneous graphs to offer feature- 
based agents for decisions (Song et al., 2023; Wan et al., 2025). Yet 
increasing graph density with problem complexity impedes efficient 
feature extraction via graph neural networks (GNNs), substantially 
increasing computational and storage cost. Since the scales of datasets 
are not consistent in scheduling environments, both training and infer­
ence in such situations always require holding uniform dimensions, with 
this limitation decreasing the efficiency of feature extraction for keeping 
consistent graph topology. As a result, these issues motivate to develop a 
new framework of HGNNs with attention mechanisms that serves as 
effective graph-embedded networks (Guo et al., 2022).
The combination of heterogeneous graphs and MHSAN can effec­
tively resolves these challenges. As shown in Fig. 2, for any instance with 
m machines and n jobs, if MHSAN is employed as graph embedding 
network, it can perform feature association and aggregation through 
MHSAN, effectively associating features between machines and jobs. 
Due to inherent compatibility of MHSAN for inputs with any length, it 
enables adaptation to diverse scales of FJSPs without architectural 
modifications. This is very meaningful for DRL-based methods to solve 
FJSPs, which allow for agent training using multiple instances of 
different scales fed to networks, capable of extracting multimodal fea­
tures and promising patterns that make the agents have strong gener­
alization capabilities. Specifically, utilizing MHSAN can effectively 
eliminate the generalization limitations of traditional graph networks 
caused by different numbers of jobs and machines for different scales of 
FJSPs. Moreover, heterogeneous graphs enable the correlation of state 
features between operations and machines, resulting in richer and 
multimodal perceptual representations. Hence, the application of graph 
embedding network using MHSAN for heterogeneous graphs enables 
efficient feature extraction across diverse instance scales.
Fig. 1. Heterogeneous graph representation of an instance for FJSP.
Fig. 2. Feature extraction for FJSP of any scale using MHSAN.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
6 

4. Proposed method
This section provides a detailed introduction to the multi-agent 
reinforcement learning framework proposed for solving FJSPs. First, 
the limitations of traditional MDP modeling methods are analyzed, and 
then a more advanced approach for modeling FJSP as a new MDP, called 
MD-MDP, is introduced. Next, a two-stage feature extraction method 
combining heterogeneous graph feature embedding with MHSAN is 
developed to address association and aggregation of features for arbi­
trary scales. Finally, a multi-agent DRL framework based on the pro­
posed MD-MDP is developed, enabling high-quality solutions for FJSPs 
through joint decision-making among agents. Additionally, a PPO-based 
training algorithm suitable for this MADRL framework is created. The 
overall process of the proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 3, with 
detailed explanations in subsections below.
4.1. Limitations of traditional MDP modeling method in FJSP
The core challenge in using DRL-based methods to solve FJSPs lies in 
formulating the scheduling decisions as MDPs. For the FJSP, it aims at 
assigning a feasible processing machine to each operation while deter­
mining the sequence of operations to be executed on each machine. For 
traditional method of modeling FJSPs as MDPs, these processes are 
implemented through agent decisions from the valid action space |Avalid|
at each decision time T(t), where t denotes the decision step. At the 
initial time (t = 1, T(1) = 0) when the agent needs to make the first 
decision, the action space |A| is composed of all O - M pairs formed by 
pairwise combinations of each operation Oi,j and each machine Mk. Note 
that an operation Oi,j becomes available when its release time is less than 
or equal to T(t), while a machine Mk is free when its release time is less 
than or equal to T(t). It should be noted that not all O - M pairs are 
executable actions; only when the process Oi,j corresponding to job Ji is 
in available state, the corresponding Mk is in idle state, and the operation 
Oi,j can be processed on Mk, it can be considered as a valid scheduling 
action. All valid actions constitute the valid action space |Avalid|. At each 
decision time T(t), the agent selects an action from |Avalid|, executes it 
and transitions to the next state, yeliding a new state with updated 
|Avalid| for the agent to make action decisions for T(t + 1). As the envi­
ronment transfers to the next state and |Avalid| = {∅}, it will transfer T(t)
to the next state with |Avalid| ∕= {∅}, referred to as Tʹ(t). This process of 
repeatedly selecting actions continues until a final solution is found for 
an instance of FJSP. To describe the proposed modeling method intui­
tively, we present a 3 × 3 instance (3 machines, 3 jobs, 3 operations per 
job) for illustration. The processing time of every operation on each 
machine is shown in Table 3.
For this FJSP case study, we first use the traditional MDP method to 
solve it, as shown in Fig. 4. This traditional MDP modeling method has 
been adopted in exisiting works (Song et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024). In 
Fig. 4, available jobs and idle machines are marked in green, while 
illegal and legal O - M pairs are marked in red and black, respectively. 
All O - M pairs constitute the action space |A|. For the determined 
scheduling actions, they are labeled on Gantt charts and heterogeneous 
graphs. At each decision step t, the agent needs to make appropriate 
action choices based on the scheduling state. As shown in Fig. 4 (a), the 
red dashed line represents the current decision time T(t) at initial 
moment, with all jobs (J1~J3) and machines (M1~M3) release times at 
0. Since all operations are processed on any machine, the action space at 
this time is |A| = |Avalid|. Based on this, the agent makes its first 
scheduling decision at t = 1 and T(1) = 0. Assuming that the action 
chosen by the agent from |Avalid| is O2,1 - M3 (determined actions are 
marked by orange dashed box in |A| and thick orange lines in the het­
erogeneous graph), the environment executes this action to trigger state 
transition for new decision, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). This MDP for agent 
decisions driving environment state transitions repeatedly iterates until 
Fig. 3. The overall framework of the MAMHSAN.
Table 3 
An example of 3 × 3 scale instance for FJSP.
Jobs
Operations
Optional machines and processing time
M1
M2
M3
J1
O1,1
3
4
4
O1,2
2
1
1
J1
O2,1
4
4
2
O2,2
1
2
4
J3
O3,1
2
8
2
O3,2
1
4
4
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
7 

a scheduling solution is found. It is intended to point out the limitations 
of modeling the FJSP as the traditional MDP through the illustrations. 
Thus, in Fig. 4, the agent’s scheduling action decisions are made 
randomly from the valid action space |Avalid|. For FJSP’s instance shown 
in Table 3, the final scheduling scheme is shown in Fig. 4 (a)-(h), with 
the makespan of 9 shown in Fig. 4 (h).
From the final scheduling results, it can be easily observed that the 
action choice O3,1 - M2 affects the final decision. As shown in Table 1, 
the processing times for operation O3,1 on M1 and M3 are shorter 
compared to M2. If the operation O3,1 can be processed on M1 or M3, the 
final makespan will be reduced, thereby improving the quality of 
scheduling solution. Let us return to the scheduling decision for 
Fig. 4. Scheduling decision process for solving FJSP with traditional MDP.
Fig. 5. Scheduling changes with decision time T(t) transfer in Fig. 4 (c).
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
8 

O3,1 - M2, as shown in Fig. 4 (c), at which point the only action left in 
|Avalid| is O3,1 - M2. In traditional MDP modeling, as long as the |Avalid| is 
not empty, i.e., |Avalid| ∕= {∅}, the agent should select an action from 
|Avalid|. So, in this state, the agent has to choose O3,1 - M2 and cannot 
cancel the scheduled operations. If we want the agent to have more 
optional actions, that is, to expand the |Avalid|, then flexibly transferring 
decision time T(t) is a wise way.
So, what if we could handle the T(t) more flexibly? Let us return to 
the situation in Fig. 4 (c): at this decision time (i.e., T(3) =
0), the 
release times of machine M1 and job J1 are 3, and those of machine M3 
and job J2 are 2. As a result, machines M1 and M3 are occupied, and jobs 
J1 and J2 are unavailable, leaving only action O3,1 - M2 as a valid option 
in the action space. Following existing methods, the agent can only be 
forced to choose this action O3,1 - M2, as shown in Fig. 5 (a). However, it 
is clear from the analysis and results in Fig. 4 that the choice of this 
action will produce suboptimal results. To break this status quo, we 
attempt to change the current time T(3) = 0 by shifting the T(t) to Tʹ(t), 
i.e., T(3)⇒Tʹ(3), as shown in Fig. 5 (b). This adjustment makes jobs J1 
and J3 available, while machines M2 and M3 become idle, thus 
increasing the number of valid actions in the action space. As a result, 
O3,1 no longer has to be processed on M2 but can choose O3,1 - M3 with a 
shorter processing time; similarly, O2,2 is no longer enforced to be pro­
cessed on M3, but it has the option of choosing O2,2 - M2 with shorter 
processing time. Assume that the options of assigning O3,1 to M3 and O2,2 
to M2 are chosen, as shown in Fig. 5 (b) and (c). To reflect the decision 
effect of the overall action choices by altering T(t), existing methods are 
adopted for scheduling subsequent operations, sequentially assigning 
O1,2 to M1 and O3,2 to M2 (see Fig. 5 (d)). Compared to Fig. 4, this scheme 
results in shorter processing times for O2,2 and O3,1, achieving superior 
makespan = 8.
The state in Fig. 5 (b) can be derived even further: the release times 
for machine M1 and job J1 are 3, and for machine M3 and job J2 are 2 
when T(3) = 2. At this time, machine M1 is occupied and job J1 is un­
available. If existing methods are used, the agent will face two sched­
uling actions: O3,1 - M3 and O2,2 - M2 (see Fig. 6 (a)). For the scheduled 
operation O2,2 of job J2, its processing time on M1 is the shortest 
(PT2,2,1 = 1), yet machine M1 is occupied. To break this status quo, we 
decided to adjust T(3) = 2 by shifting it to Tʹ(t), i.e., T(3)⇒Tʹ(3), which 
corresponds to the release times of machine M1 and job J1 (see Fig. 6
(b)). At this time, jobs J1, J2, and J3 are all available, and machines M1, 
M2, and M3 are idle, making all actions in the action space valid. For 
operation O3,1, it has the shortest processing time option of O3,1 - M3 
(PT3,1,3 = 2); for operation O2,2, the option is O2,2 - M1 with the shortest 
processing time (PT2,2,1 = 1); and for operation O1,2, the shortest 
processing time option is O1,2 - M2 (PT1,2,2 = 1). Based on this adjust­
ment, the decision is made to schedule O3,1 to M3, O2,2 to M1, and O1,2 to 
M2, respectively (see Fig. 6 (c)). Similarly, to reflect the decision effect of 
all action choices by altering T(t), existing methods are used for 
scheduling of subsequent operations, resulting in O3,2 being assigned to 
M1, as shown in Fig. 6 (d). Compared to the scheduling scheme 
described in Fig. 4, this scheduling scheme yields optimal processing for 
O1,2, O2,2, and O3,1, while significantly reducing their final complete 
times with makespan = 6. It is clear that by appropriately adjusting the 
decision time T(t) in the scheduling process, scheduling solutions ob­
tained are already significantly better than those achieved by existing 
methods. Existing modeling methods have one obvious drawback: the 
agent must make decisions from a non-empty set of valid actions, i.e., 
|Avalid| ∕= {∅}, regardless of whether or not actions are appropriate. This 
inappropriate decisions may lead to two issues: Firstly, each operation is 
forced to choose an unsuitable processing machine, resulting in pro­
longed processing times. Secondly, incorrect scheduling at critical de­
cision times may result in occupied machines, thus preventing suitable 
processing machines for subsequent operations. For the first scenario, as 
shown in Fig. 4 (c), by opting to shift the T(t) from T(3) = 0 to T(3) = 2 
in Fig. 5 (b), it can avoid the processing of operation O3,1 on machine M2 
(where O3,1 has the longest processing time on machine M2 with 
PT3,1,2 = 8). For the second scenario, as shown in Fig. 6 (b), if no 
avaiable action is undertaken and T(3) = 2 is changed to T(3) = 3, 
effectively waiting for machine M1 to complete operation O1,1, opera­
tion O2,2 gains the opportunity to be processed on machine M1 (O2,2 has 
the minimum processing time on machine M1 with PT2,2,1 = 1). 
Accordingly, if the T(t) can be adjusted in time based on the current state 
of the action space in scheduling process, the agent will have broader 
and better choices, which is beneficial for scheduling decisions. Based on 
this insight, we propose a new method for modeling FJSPs as MDPs to 
address this deficiency.
4.2. Multi-dimensional MDP
Drawing from the preceding discussion, this section first introduces a 
novel method for modeling FJSPs as effective MDPs. We enhance 
existing modeling methods by incorporating transfer actions and mul­
tiple rewards, namely multi-dimensional action and reward MDP (MD- 
MDP). This modeling approach effectively overcomes limitations posed 
by constrained action spaces. In MD-MDP, at the t−th step, the sched­
uling action at is determined jointly by two actions (a1
t and a2
t ): a1
t rec­
ognizes the potential transition from the current decision time T(t) to 
Tʹ(t), and a2
t determines the selection of scheduling actions from the 
Fig. 6. Scheduling changes with decision time T(t) transfer in Fig. 5 (b).
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
9 

current action space |A|. If the action a1
t involves transferring from T(t)
to Tʹ(t), then at = a1
t ; otherwise, at = a2
t . In MD-MDP, multiple rewards 
are formulated based on the effects of joint action at. Specifically, if at =
a1
t , the reward is rt = r1
t , and if at = a2
t , the reward is rt = r2
t . Detailed 
reward definitions are provided in subsequent sections. To optimize 
agent decision-making, the state st is decomposed into two components: 
s1
t and s2
t . s1
t contains complete states in global scheduling environment 
and the action space |A| at decision time T(t), which enables the agent to 
refine decision time T(t) for improved decision efficacy. s2
t represents 
both the state of the scheduling environment and the relationship be­
tween current operations to be scheduled and the machine at decision 
time T(t). This informs the agent’s selection of superior scheduling ac­
tions from the action space |A|. The MD-MDP is defined as follows:
State Definition: The state st consists of s1
t and s2
t . s1
t represents the 
state of the current action space, and s2
t represents the overall state of the 
current scheduling environment. The original feature φk of machine Mk 
features has three parts: the adjacent node feature λi,j,k from the het­
erogeneous graph representation, the feature λʹ
i,j,k derived via SHSAN 
pooling, and the corresponding machine node in heterogeneous graph 
concatenated with γk. This feature composition is defined by Eq. (11). 
The global feature is composed of the original operation feature μi,j and 
machine feature φk, which are pooled and concatenated to yield new 
features μʹ
i,j and φʹ
k through their respective MHSANs, as formalized in 
Eq. (13). Consequently, the state s1
t is composed of the global features ϕ, 
action space features αT, and the next decision time feature σT concat­
enated together (see Eq. (14)). Similarly, the state s2
t consists of the 
global features ϕ, the original O - M pair features ξi,j,k, and new opera­
tion features and machine features νʹ (see Eq. (15)). At the decision time 
T(t), detailed definitions of the original features μi,j, ξi,j,k, ψk, λi,j,k, the 
action space feature αT and αT are provided in Appendix. 
γk =
1
|H k|
∑
Oi,j∈H k
λʹ
i,j,k
(11) 
φk = [γk‖ψk]
(12) 
ϕ =
⎡
⎣1
|O ʹ|
∑
Oi,j∈O ʹ
μʹ
i,j‖ 1
|M|
∑
Mk∈M
φʹ
k
⎤
⎦
(13) 
s1
t = [ϕ‖ηT‖σT]
(14) 
s2
t =
[
ϕ‖μʹ
i,j‖φʹ
k‖ξi,j,k
]
(15) 
Joint Action: In MD-MDP, the joint action at comprises two distinct 
dimensions of actions (a1
t and a2
t ). Among them, a1
t represents trans­
ferring the current decision time from T(t) to Tʹ(t), and a2
t represents 
executing a scheduling action selected from the valid action space |Avalid|
composed of feasible O - M pairs, which means immediately processing 
the process Oi,j corresponding to a2
t on machine Mk.
State Transition: The states of the environment change primarily 
during the execution of actions and the automatic transition of decision 
times in the environment. Specifically, the two actions a1
t and a2
t pro­
posed in this method correspond to different state transition methods for 
the environment. If at decision time T(t) executes the action at = a1
t , the 
environment modifies T(t) to transition it to Tʹ(t). Conversely, if at de­
cision time T(t) executes the action at = a2
t , the action corresponding to 
a2
t is carried out, and the scheduling states of both operation Oi,j and 
machine Mk associated with this scheduling action is updated and 
maintained. After the agent has executed the action a2
t , if it is found that 
the set of the valid action space |Avalid| is empty (i.e., |Avalid| = {∅}) at 
next time T(t + 1), the environment adaptively modifies T(t + 1), 
transitioning it to the decision time Tʹ(t + 1).
Reward Design: Within the proposed MD-MDP framework, the 
calculation method of rewards rt varies due to different action di­
mensions. When at = a1
t , the reward rt is calculated as the time differ­
ence between Tʹ(t) and T(t), as defined in Eq. (16). When at = a2
t , the 
reward rt is derived from the completion time before and after the 
execution of the action. Concretely, ̃
C (Oi,j,t) is defined as the estimated 
completion time of operation Oi,j at T(t). The completion time of Oi,j is 
determined as the end time of the preceding operation plus the pro­
cessing time required. The estimated makespan is the maximum under 
the current environment among all operations’ estimated completion 
times, i.e., max
Oi,j∈O
̃
C
(
Oi,j,t
)
. For any operation Oi,j, if it has been scheduled, 
the completion time is the actual completion time. If it has not been 
scheduled, its completion time represents the completion time of the 
previous operation Oi,j−1 plus average processing time across available 
machines (see Eq. (17)). Note that at the initial time before scheduling 
has begun, all jobs are available, it means, ̃
C (Oi,0,t) = 0. Through 
iterative recursion, we compute estimated completion times for all op­
erations, enabling the calculation of the estimated makespan. Therefore, 
by evaluating the estimated makespan before and after executing the 
action a2
t , the reward rt can be determined via Eq. (18). 
rt = T(t) −Tʹ(t)
(16) 
̃
C (Oi,j,t) = ̃
C (Oi,j−1,t) +
1
|Mi,j|
∑
k∈Mi,j
PTi,j,k
(17) 
Fig. 7. Schematic of feature extraction for machine nodes in MHSAN.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
10 

rt = max
Oi,j∈O
̃
C
(
Oi,j,t
)
−max
Oi,j∈O
̃
C
(
Oi,j,t+1
)
(18) 
4.3. Heterogeneous graph-based MHSAN framework
To effectively address FJSPs with various scales and handle both 
storage and computational costs of feature extraction based on graph 
structures, this section proposes a new feature extraction method for the 
scheduling environment of FJSPs through MHSAN with heterogeneous 
graphs. In this method, the first feature embedding is performed on each 
machine node and its adjacent operations nodes via an attention 
network based on the representation of scheduling of FJSPs using het­
erogeneous graphs, as shown in Fig. 7. Due to the fact that the set Mi,j of 
selectable machines for each operation Oi,j is never empty, the feature 
embedding for each machine effectively utilizes graph structures for 
feature representation, effectively capturing the potential connections of 
complex relationships between the operations and machines for FJSPs. 
Based on this, machine features embedded after the first feature 
embedding and the original features of the carefully designed operations 
are passed through MHSAN for the second feature embedding, as shown 
in Fig. 8. This process inputs all machine and operation features as se­
quences with length m and n into their respective MHSANs for mapping 
new features. Depending on these advantages of MHSAN, MHSAN can 
effectively process any number of machine and operation features, while 
making the feature information between each machine and operation 
interrelated, effectively extracting the overall feature information from 
scheduling environments for agents to make high-quality decisions.
4.3.1. Machine feature extraction based on heterogeneous graphs
In the MHSAN formulated by heterogeneous graph representation, 
we have designed as follows: each machine node contains its feature, 
denoted as ψk, while its adjacent nodes (all operation nodes) form the set 
H k. Each operation node in H k contains features represented as λi,j,k. 
The SHSAN is employed to extract features from these operation nodes 
in H k. The features of all operation nodes in H k are arranged into a 
sequence, then transformed by SHSAN through node-wise correlations 
to generate new features λʹ
i,j,k. Subsequently, the average pooling is used 
to these new features of these nodes yielding the aggregated feature 
γk(see Eq. (11)). This feature ψk is concatenated with γk of the machine 
node Mk to yield final feature φk of machine Mk (see Eq. (12)). The 
details of SHSAN, implemented through trainable weight matrices W1, 
W2, and W3, is formalized in Eqs. (19)-(20). By extracting features from 
adjacent nodes across all machine nodes, the features of machine nodes 
can effectively reflect the scheduling states. Fig. 7 illustrates this process 
of extracting the features of machine nodes. 
αi,j,k = SoftMax
Oiʹ,jʹ∈H k
( 〈
W1λi,j,k, W2λiʹ,jʹ,k
〉)
=
exp
( 〈
W1λi,j,k, W2λi,j,k
〉)
∑
Oiʹ,jʹ∈H kexp
( 〈
W1λi,j,k, W2λiʹ,jʹ,k
〉).
(19) 
λʹ
i,j,k = LeakyRELU
( ∑
|H k|
h=1
αi,j,k,hW3λiʹ,jʹ,k
)
, ∀Oiʹ,jʹ ∈H k
(20) 
4.3.2. Machine and operation features embedding
Through feature embedding based on heterogeneous graphs, each 
node of machine Mk contains the features of its adjacent node set H k. 
However, this method does not capture the information of operations 
nodes that cannot be processed on machine Mk. Meanwhile, the poten­
tial relationships between various operations in the environment are 
equally important for decision-making of agents. To address these lim­
itations, we apply MHSAN to perform secondary feature embedding on 
machine features after the first feature embedding and original features 
of the designed process, as shown in Fig. 8. Specifically, in their 
respective MHSANs, the calculation of attention coefficients αl
i,ci,iʹ and 
αl
k,kʹ between machines Mk and Mkʹ in layer l, as well as between oper­
ations Oi,ci and Oiʹ,ciʹ, is shown in Eq. (21). These coefficients yield the 
output results μl
i,ci, φl
k of machine features φk and operation features μi,ci 
at layer l are defined in Eq. (22). Finally, MHSAN concatenates layer 
output results to generate new features φʹ, μʹ
i,ci for each machine Mk and 
Fig. 8. Schematic of state embedding for multi-agent joint decision-making in MAMHSAN.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
11 

operation Oi,ci, as defined in Eq. (23). Here, Z1
l , Z2
l , Z3
l , X1
l , X2
l , and X3
l 
denote distinct learnable parameter matrices at layer l. 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
αl
k,kʹ =
exp
( 〈
Z1
l φk, Z2
l φkʹ
〉)
∑
Mkʹ∈Mexp
( 〈
Z1
l φk, Z2
l φkʹ
〉).
αl
i,ci,iʹ =
exp
( 〈
X1
l μi,ci, X2
l μiʹ,ciʹ
〉)
∑
Jiʹ∈Jexp
( 〈
X1
l μi,ci, X2
l μiʹ,ciʹ
〉).
(21) 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩
φl
k = LeakyRELU
( ∑
Mkʹ∈M
αl
k,kʹZ3
l φkʹ
)
.
μl
i,ci = LeakyRELU
(∑
Jiʹ∈J
αl
i,ci,iʹX3
l μiʹ,ciʹ
)
.
(22) 
⎧
⎨
⎩
φʹ
k =
[
φ1
k‖φ2
k‖⋯‖φl
k
]
.
μʹ
i,ci =
[
μ1
i,ci‖μ2
i,ci‖⋯‖μl
i,ci
]
.
(23) 
4.4. Joint decision making by multiple agents
Based on the MD-MDP, this section proposes a multi-agent DRL 
framework (MAMHSAN) based on MHSAN and heterogeneous graph 
embedding method for solving the FJSP. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the 
MHSAN first extracts the designed state features s1
t and s2
t from the 
scheduling environment. Based on these states, the two agents collab­
oratively determine the action to be executed. Following this, agents 
execute these actions, resulting in a state transition. By iteratively 
repeating this process, we can achieve scheduling for the FJSP and 
obtain the final solution. Specifically, the design of two agents to make 
action decisions based on the states is as follows.
4.4.1. Decision-time transfer agent
The design of the DDT agent is based on the actor-critic network 
framework. For the DDT agent, the actor-network is the MLP with pa­
rameters θ. It receives the input state s1
t and outputs probability values 
over the two actions in the action space |Ω|. The two actions are as 
follows: Action 1 transit the decision time T(t) from the environment to 
Tʹ(t), and Action 2 maintain T(t) without change. As defined in Eq. (24), 
DDT agent’s actor network’s final layer uses the SoftMax activation 
function to compute the probabilities for these two actions. Thus, the 
DDT agent’s actor-network derives the probability distribution over 
actions in the action space |Ω|. 
πθ(a1
t |s1
t ) = SoftMax(MLPθ[ϕ‖ηT‖σT] )
(24) 
The DDT agent’s critic network with parameters ζ is used to evaluate 
the current state. It takes s1
t as input and outputs a scalar value vζ(s1
t ), 
which represents the state’s estimated values. Note that the primary 
purpose of the critic network is to facilitate the training of the DDT 
agent’s actor network.
4.4.2. Scheduling action selection agent
The design of the scheduling action selection (SAS) agent is also 
based on the actor-critic network framework. For the SAS agent, the 
actor-network with parameter ω utilizes the state s2
t to generate the 
probability distribution over the action space |A|. The action space |A|
comprises multiple O - M pairs formed by the combination of all 
pending processing orders and all machines under the decision time T(t). 
Specifically, the SAS agent’s actor network first scores the action space 
|A|, as detailed in Eq. (25). After filtering out all infeasible O - M pairs 
(scores for infeasible O - M pairs are set to negative infinity), a 
probability distribution for the scheduling actions is derived based on 
the scores, as shown in Eq. (26). 
c(a2
t |s2
t ) = MLPω
[
ϕ‖μʹ
i,j‖φʹ
k‖ξi,j,k
]
(25) 
πω(a2
t |s2
t ) =
exp
(
c
(
a2
t |s2
t
) )
∑
b2
t ∈|A|texp
(
c
(
b2
t |s2
t
) )
(26) 
4.5. Training details
The training process of MADRL frameworks requires coordinating 
agents to optimize policies for environmental adaptation during dy­
namic interactions, and necessitates designing appropriate reward 
mechanisms and update rules to achieve cooperative optimization. We 
employ a randomly generated dataset εtr with specified scale (n × m) as 
the training set to train the DDT and SAS agents over N episodes. The 
DDT agent comprises a training actor-network πθ, a behavior actor- 
network πθold, and a critic-network vζ, with respective trainable param­
eters θ, θold, and ζ. Similarly, the SAS-agent incorporates a training actor- 
network πω, a behavior actor-network πωold, and a critic-network vϛ, with 
trainable network parameters ω, ωold, and ϛ. At each training episode’s 
outset, we randomly sample an instance εtrn and initialize the environ­
ment. The DDT and SAS agents then interact with this environment 
through the following process: At timestep t, the environment provides 
the current state; Both agents collaboratively select a joint action at (at =
[
a1
t , a2
t
]
); The environment executes scheduling action at, yielding 
reward rt, and transitioning to state st+1. This interaction persists for T 
times until all operations are scheduled to appropriate machines. During 
the interaction, we collect experiences (st, at, rt, st+1) in a replay buffer, 
where at includes a1
t provided by the DDT agent and a2
t provided by the 
SAS agent, and rt is determined by the executed actions. These experi­
ences are employed to update both agents’ network parameters. The 
training procedure is given in Algorithm 1. 
LCLIP(θ)t = min
{
δθ
t A1
t , clip(δθ
t , 1 −ε, 1 + ε)A1
t
}
(27) 
LMSE(ζ)t = MSE
(
Ut, vζ
(
s1
t
) )
(28) 
LCLIP(ω)t = min
{
δω
t A2
t , clip
(
δω
t , 1 −ε, 1 + ε
)
A2
t
}
(29) 
LMSE(ϛ)t = MSE
(
Ut, vϛ(s2
t )
)
(30) 
To optimize both DTT and SAS agent networks, we implement an 
improved multi-agent proximal policy optimization (MA-PPO) algo­
rithm. Specifically, at each timestep t, the DDT agent and SAS agent 
compute their respective advantages (A1
t and A2
t ) and probability ratios 
(δθ
t and δω
t ) using experience tuple (st,at,rt,st+1). These values determine 
the actor-network and critic-network losses per timestep for both agents, 
with specific calculations derived following Eqs. (27)-(30). When action 
a1
t triggers transitions to decision time Tʹ(t), the SAS agent does not 
contribute to decision-making, thus its loss is nullified. After aggregating 
losses across all timesteps, we compute their mean, apply corresponding 
loss coefficients, and derive the final losses for each agent’s actor and 
critic networks. These composite losses drive network parameter up­
dates via stochastic gradient descent. Finally, the updated network pa­
rameters θ and ω then synchronize behavior policy parameters θold and 
ωold, repeating this process K times. The complete update procedure is 
depicted in Algorithm 2.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
12 

After the MADRL framework has been trained for a certain number of 
iterations, we employ a fixed validation set εval to evaluate the model’s 
performance. Throughout the experimental design, we have imple­
mented two distinct action selection strategies. The first is greedy se­
lection: we select the action with the highest probability from the 
probability distributions provided by the DDT agent and the SAS agent 
for execution. This greedy selection method is utilized for the purpose of 
validation. The second strategy is stochastic sampling: we sample 
random actions from the distributions offered by DTT and SAS agents for 
execution. This stochastic sampling method is applied during the 
training phase to encourage the agents to explore the action space as 
thoroughly as possible. These strategies are crucial for balancing the 
trade-offs between exploration and exploitation in the proposed MADRL 
framework. The greedy selection ensures that agents perform optimally 
using current experience and problem-specific knowledge, while the 
sampling strategy facilitates finding potentially promising actions that 
may not be immediately apparent. This dual-strategy framework sup­
ports comprehensive evaluation and continuous improvement of the 
agents’ decision-making capabilities.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
13 

5. Experimental details
This section presents a numerical comparison of MAMHSAN against 
multiple baseline methods, including: well-known priority dispatching 
rules (PDRs), effective exact method provided by Google OR-Tools, a 
conventional genetic algorithm, and a DRL-based method. To compre­
hensively evaluate its effectiveness in terms of scheduling performance, 
generalization capability, and computational efficiency, we employ both 
synthetic instances and established FJSP benchmarks.
5.1. Experimental settings
5.1.1. Configuration
The hardware utilized in this research comprises a 12th Gen Intel (R) 
Core (TM) i5-12400F CPU. The graphical processing unit featured is the 
NVIDIA GEFORCE RTX 4060, which has a memory capacity of 16055 
MB. The software environment includes Python version 3.8.0, alongside 
PyTorch, which is present in version 2.1.0. In this study, we conduct a 
numerical comparison of MAMHSAN against various baseline methods, 
including well-known PDRs, the exact method provided by Google OR- 
Tools, a typical genetic algorithm IJA, regular GA (RegGA) (Rooyani & 
Defersha, 2019), two-stage genetic algorithm (2SGA), and self-learning 
GA (SLGA) (Chen et al., 2020), and a DRL-based method (Lei et al., 
2022; Song et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024). To evaluate its effectiveness 
in terms of scheduling performance, generalization ability, and 
computational efficiency, we utilize both synthetically generated in­
stances and commonly employed public FJSP benchmarks. Table 4
presents the hyperparameter configurations for the MA-PPO algorithm.
5.1.2. Datasets
In this study, the datasets are categorized into three separate groups: 
the training set, the validation set, and the testing set. We employ syn­
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
14 

thesis to generate the training set and validation set data to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the MAMHSAN in the DRL model training. Additionally, 
to evaluate the effect of different dataset sizes on model training, the 
training and validation sets are divided into various sizes, specifically 
300, 400, 500, and 600. As for the testing set, its purpose is to bench­
mark the performance of the MAMHSAN against existing algorithms. 
Therefore, we utilize public datasets, namely Barnes, Brandimarte, 
Dauzere, and Hurink (edata, rdata, vdata), which can be accessed at http 
s://people.idsia.ch/~monaldo/fjsp.html. Table 5 presents a detailed 
design of the synthetic datasets used in this study. For an FJSP instance 
with a scale of 10 × 5, we set the range of the number of operations for 
each job to 5 to 6, and for any operation, we set the number of machines 
that can be processed to a range of 2 to 5, set all operations processing 
time on the machine to range from 3 to 10. For the scale of 20 × 5, we set 
the range of the number of operations for each job to 5 to 6, and for any 
operation, we set the number of machines that can be processed to a 
range of 2 to 5, set all operations processing time on the machine to 
range from 3 to 10. For the scale of 15 × 10, we set the range of the 
number of operations for each job to 8 to 10, and for any operation, we 
set the number of machines that can be processed to a range of 4 to 10, 
set all operations processing time on the machine to range from 8 to 20. 
For the scale of 20 × 10, we set the range of the number of operations for 
each job to 8 to 10, and for any operation, we set the number of ma­
chines that can be processed to a range of 4 to 10, set all operations 
processing time on the machine to range from 8 to 20.
5.1.3. Evaluation metrics and baselines
For solving FJSP, the objective is to optimize the makespan, which 
represents the total completion time of all jobs. To highlight the per­
formance differences among various algorithms on the dataset, we 
employ the relative percentage deviation (RPD) metric to assess the 
performance of algorithms in optimizing the makespan (Pan et al., 
2023). The RPD is calculated as shown in Eq. (31), where Cʹ
max is the 
makespan obtained by a specific algorithm for each instance, and C*
max is 
the solution obtained by Google OR-Tools, which can be accessed at htt 
ps://developers.google.cn/optimization. For each FJSP instance, we use 
Google OR Tools to run for 30 min and obtain the result C*
max. 
RPD = Cʹ
max −C*
max
C*
max
× 100%
(31) 
To evaluate the effectiveness of each algorithm involved in this 
study, a series of comparative experiments with ten different algorithms 
were carried out. For these metaheuristic methods, including the IJA, 
RegGA (Rooyani & Defersha, 2019), 2SGA, and SLGA (Chen et al., 
2020), the data for these algorithms mainly comes from the data pro­
vided in their respective papers. As for composite PDRs, we utilize the 
FIFO, MWKR, and MOPNR methods, which have demonstrated robust 
performance (Sels et al., 2012). It is worth mentioning that we have 
introduced EET (i.e., early end time) based on these rules to form 
composite rules for solving FJSP. These composite rules have shown 
good performance in experiments conducted in multiple studies (Lei 
et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024). Meanwhile, in order to 
fully verify the solving performance and generalization ability of 
MAMHSAN, we compared it with three state-of-the-art DRL based 
methods. These three are the DRL models proposed by Song et al. (2023)
based on heterogeneous graph neural network feature extraction, Lei 
et al. (2022) based on discrete graph feature embedding, and Yuan et al. 
(2024) based on lightweight MLP feature extraction. These three DRL- 
based models for solving FJSP represent the most popular feature 
extraction methods currently available, and their reproducibility comes 
from the source code provided in their respective papers. Source code 
details are available at https://github.com/HuangTongShuaiGe/MA 
MHSA_for_fjsp.
5.2. Experimental results
5.2.1. Analysis of policy training
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed MA-PPO algorithm for 
MAMHSAN, we tested the MAMHSAN trained on multiple training sets 
of different sizes. Specifically we configured the training datasets with 
scales of 10 × 5, 20 × 5, 15 × 10, and 20 × 10, each consisting of 100 
instances, with a total of 1000 iterations conducted, and validated the 
MAMHSAN every 5 iterations during the training process. The valida­
tion datasets matched the scales used in the training, also comprising 
100 instances. For each validation, the average makespan of all in­
stances in the validation set was adopted as the performance metric for 
the MAMHSAN on the validation set. As shown in Fig. 9 the MAMHSAN 
demonstrates good convergence across training datasets of varying 
scales, reflecting the rationality of the proposed algorithm’s framework 
design and the feasibility of the proposed MA-PPO.
To verify the generalization ability of the MAMHSAN, we tested it on 
common examples based on models trained on different training sets. 
For each FJSP instance in the dataset, we will use Google OR Tools to 
solve them separately, and the specific detailed data will be provided in 
Tables 8–13. Based on the results of Google OR Tools, use it as the upper 
bound for solving the FJSP instance, and calculate its gap through Eq. 
(31) to demonstrate the quality of the algorithm’s solution. To facilitate 
a clearer and more intuitive display of the MAMHSAN’s generalization 
ability, the performance of the MAMHSAN on a certain dataset for each 
training set is represented by taking the average gap of all FJSP instances 
on that dataset. The specific experimental results are shown in Table 6. 
From Table 6, it can be seen that due to different training sets, the 
performance of MAMHSAN on the same dataset varies. Specifically, 
when using a training set with a size of 10 × 5, MAMHSAN performed 
the best on all datasets, even showing an average gap of 1.63 % on the 
Hurink (vdata) dataset. This result proves that MAMHSAN’s solving 
performance is very close to Google OR Tools to a certain extent. When 
using training sets of 15 × 10 and 20 × 10 scales, their solving perfor­
mance is somewhat similar. Compared to other training sets, when using 
a training set with a size of 20 × 5, the solving performance of 
MAMHSAN is relatively low. To some extent, due to the inconsistent 
problem size between the training and testing sets, the model may not 
have good solving performance. Currently, the generalization mecha­
nism for DRL model networks is still in its infancy (Witty et al., 2021). 
Meanwhile, in order to verify whether the proposed MAMHSAN can 
efficiently face FJSP of various scales, we recorded its average solution 
time on each dataset in Table 6. The method for calculating the average 
solution time is to divide the total solution times of each instance in 
MAMHSAN within each dataset by the number of FJSP instances in that 
Table 4 
Hyperparameter details.
Hyperparameters
Values
Number of episodes (N)
500
Number of policy updates (K)
3
Number of interval episodes per validation (V)
5
Learning rate (lr)
1 × 10−3
Policy loss coefficient (cactor)
1
Critic loss coefficient (ccritic)
0.5
Reward discount factor (γ)
0.98
Clipping coefficient (ε)
0.2
Table 5 
Details of synthetic datasets.
Size (n × m)
ni
Mi,j
PTi,j,k
10 × 5
U(5,6)
U(2,5)
U(3,10)
20 × 5
U(5,6)
U(2,5)
U(3,10)
15 × 10
U(8,10)
U(4,10)
U(8,20)
20 × 10
U(8,10)
U(4,10)
U(8,20)
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
15 

dataset. In previous graph-based GNN and DLR methods, the computa­
tional cost increased with the size of the training set. From Table 6, it is 
apparent that although the sizes of various public datasets differ, 
MAMHSAN’s solution time remains nearly the same regardless of the 
training set size used to solve them. This clearly shows that MAMHSAN 
can effectively handle FJSP of any size while achieving high-quality 
solutions with lower computational costs.
5.2.2. Performance on public benchmarks
To verify the effectiveness of the MAMHSAN, this subsection 
compared it with several state-of-the-art DRL-based methods and PDR 
methods using public datasets: Barnes, Brandimarte, Dauzere, and 
Hurink, respectively. The DRL-based methods proposed by Yuan et al. 
(2024), Song et al. (2023), and Lei et al. (2022). These PDR methods are 
described as FIFO, MWKR, and MOPNR, respectively. Moreover, we also 
included experimental results from effective metaheuristic methods for 
Table 6 
Average Gap and time of MAMHSAN on public datasets under different sizes for training datasets.
Size
Barnes
Brandimarte
Dauzere
Hurink(rdata)
Hurink(edata)
Hurink(vdata)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
10 × 5
10.73 %
2.12
4.47 %
1.53
5.12 %
3.18
7.63 %
1.75
9.24 %
1.84
1.63 %
1.84
20 × 5
22.98 %
2.08
12.99 %
1.52
10.28 %
3.23
15.6 %
1.77
21.02 %
1.78
12.63 %
1.78
15 × 10
17.57 %
2.08
12.56 %
1.41
8.66 %
3.18
15.6 %
1.83
16.78 %
1.71
8.29 %
1.72
20 × 10
31.93 %
2.11
13.34 %
1.48
15.03 %
3.36
22.32 %
1.84
28.36 %
1.84
8.8 %
1.81
Fig. 9. Convergence curves of MAMHSAN under different training dataset scales.
Table 7 
Comparison of average gap and average time on public datasets with various baselines.
Methods
Barnes
Brandimarte
Dauzere
Hurink(rdata)
Hurink(edata)
Hurink(vdata)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
Gap
Time(s)
IJA
2.40 %
21.03
8.50 %
15.43
6.10 %
180.8
3.90 %
19.72
4.60 %
15.24
2.70 %
17.85
RegGA
−
−
8.39 %
280.10
−
−
−
−
−
−
3.20 %
191.40
2SGA
−
−
3.17 %
57.60
−
−
−
−
−
−
0.39 %
51.43
SLGA
−
−
6.21 %
283.28
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
FIFO
27.91 %
0.019
28.98 %
0.017
15.00 %
0.036
17.38 %
0.018
19.89 %
0.016
7.14 %
0.019
MWKR
54.71 %
0.018
39.50 %
0.019
24.69 %
0.036
26.60 %
0.018
44.68 %
0.018
8.96 %
0.020
MOPNR
50.66 %
0.017
43.39 %
0.018
32.17 %
0.038
26.47 %
0.019
43.67 %
0.018
13.14 %
0.019
Song et al. (2023)
17.88 %
1.67
30.04 %
1.48
8.88 %
2.86
11.02 %
1.53
16.66 %
1.58
4.41 %
1.42
Kun Lei et al. (2022)
28.96 %
2.10
13.59 %
2.05
15.68 %
3.98
16.51 %
1.68
23.01 %
1.74
6.96 %
1.66
Yuan et al. (2024)
13.83 %
0.52
13.24 %
0.58
11.02 %
0.88
12.13 %
0.33
15.54 %
0.35
5.37 %
0.31
Ours
10.73 %
2.12
4.74 %
1.53
5.12 %
3.18
7.63 %
1.75
9.24 %
1.84
1.63 %
1.84
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
16 

comparisons, which are IJA, RegGA, 2SGA, and SLGA, respectively. It is 
worth mentioning that, based on the literature (Lei et al., 2022; Song 
et al., 2023; Yuan et al., 2024) and extensive experimental evidence of 
all DRL-based methods, using a 10 × 5 scale dataset as the training set 
can improve the performance of DRL-based methods on existing public 
datasets compared to using datasets of other scales. Therefore, we used a 
10 × 5 dataset as the training set for all DRL-based methods. Meanwhile, 
to ensure fairness, all DRL-based methods adopt a random strategy 
during training and a greedy strategy during experimental testing on a 
public dataset, so that all DRL-based methods can obtain the optimal 
results of their respective algorithms.
In order to better demonstrate the performance of different algo­
rithms in solving specific FJSP cases, we take the solution results of 
Google OR Tools as the optimal solution for each case, and then use Eq. 
(31) to calculate the gap between each method and the result, which we 
refer to as gap in the article. For Google OR Tools, we set the solution 
time for each FJSP instance to 30 min. In this study, we evaluated the 
average gap and average solution time of various methods across several 
public datasets, with the final results presented in Table 7. Specifically, 
for the Barnes dataset, the MAMHSAN achieved an average gap of 10.73 
%, outperforming all other methods except for IJA, which recorded a 
gap of 2.40 %. The average gaps for the remaining methods were as 
follows: FIFO (27.91 %), MWKR (54.71 %), and MOPNR (50.66 %), 
Song et al. (2023) (17.88 %), Lei et al. (2022) (28.96 %), and Yuan et al. 
(2024) (13.83 %). These results indicate that the overall performance of 
these PDR methods is inferior to that of the DRL-based methods, with 
MAMHSAN and Yuan et al. (2024) from the DRL-based method leading 
the performance metrics. For the Brandimarte dataset, the MAMHSAN ’s 
average gap decreased to 4.74 %, again outperforming all algorithms 
except for 2SGA, which had an average gap of 3.17 %. The average gaps 
for the remaining methods were as follows: FIFO (28.98 %), MWKR 
(39.50 %), and MOPNR (43.39 %), Song et al. (2023) (30.40 %), Lei 
et al. (2022) (13.59 %), and Yuan et al. (2024) (13.24 %). Among these 
metaheuristic methods, IJA, RegGA, and SLGA had average gaps of 8.50 
%, 8.39 %, and 6.21 %, respectively. It is evident that, among the DRL- 
based methods, all except for Song et al. (2023) significantly out­
performed the PDR methods. Notably, the MAMHSAN average gap on 
this dataset even surpassed those of the IJA, RegGA, and SLGA, 
demonstrating its optimization capability. For the Dauzere dataset, the 
MAMHSAN recorded an average gap of 5.12 %, exceeding IJA’s 6.10 % 
and leading among all algorithms. The average gaps for the remaining 
methods were as follows: FIFO (15.00 %), MWKR (24.69 %), and 
MOPNR (32.17 %), Song et al. (2023) (8.88 %), Lei et al. (2022) (15.68 
%), and Yuan et al. (2024) (11.02 %), respectively. This analysis further 
confirms that the DRL-based methods continue to significantly outper­
form the PDR methods, with the MAMHSAN and Song et al. (2023)
maintaining a leading position. For the Hurink (rdata) dataset, the 
MAMHSAN exhibits an average gap of 7.63 %, which is only surpassed 
Fig. 10. Comparison chart with other DRL-based methods and PDRs.
Table 8 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Barnes.
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
mt10x
10*11
918
−
1223
33.22 %
1253
36.49 %
1358
47.93 %
1096
19.39 %
1176
28.10 %
1084
18.08 %
1022
11.33 %
mt10xx
10*12
918
−
1256
36.82 %
1253
36.49 %
1374
49.67 %
1069
16.45 %
1176
28.10 %
1084
18.08 %
1022
11.33 %
mt10xxx
10*13
918
−
1250
36.17 %
1253
36.49 %
1416
54.25 %
1069
16.45 %
1176
28.10 %
1084
18.08 %
1022
11.33 %
mt10xy
10*12
906
−
1170
29.14 %
1252
38.19 %
1391
53.53 %
1090
20.31 %
1148
26.71 %
1055
16.45 %
985
8.72 %
mt10xyz
10*13
847
−
1058
24.91 %
1111
31.17 %
1292
52.54 %
1003
18.42 %
1180
39.32 %
1020
20.43 %
966
14.05 %
mt10c1
10*11
928
−
1207
30.06 %
1252
34.91 %
1353
45.80 %
1159
24.89 %
1240
33.62 %
1096
18.10 %
1004
8.19 %
mt10cc
10*12
910
−
1178
29.45 %
1121
23.19 %
1389
52.64 %
1100
20.88 %
1226
34.73 %
1068
17.36 %
980
7.69 %
setb4x
15*11
925
−
1140
23.24 %
1664
79.89 %
1322
42.92 %
1118
20.86 %
1210
30.81 %
1022
10.49 %
1035
11.89 %
setb4xx
15*12
925
−
1149
24.22 %
1691
82.81 %
1349
45.84 %
1119
20.97 %
1210
30.81 %
1015
9.73 %
1037
12.11 %
setb4xxx
15*13
925
−
1140
23.24 %
1664
79.89 %
1282
38.59 %
1119
20.97 %
1210
30.81 %
1040
12.43 %
1035
11.89 %
setb4xy
15*12
916
−
1125
22.82 %
1664
81.66 %
1372
49.78 %
1081
18.01 %
1111
21.29 %
1019
11.24 %
1021
11.46 %
setb4xyz
15*13
905
−
1082
19.56 %
1664
83.87 %
1355
49.72 %
1149
26.96 %
1095
20.99 %
1000
10.50 %
1000
10.50 %
setb4c9
15*11
919
−
1178
28.18 %
1589
72.91 %
1379
50.05 %
1073
16.76 %
1225
33.30 %
1037
12.84 %
1040
13.17 %
setb4cc
15*12
909
−
1234
35.75 %
1532
68.54 %
1363
49.94 %
1016
11.77 %
1180
29.81 %
993
9.24 %
1037
14.08 %
seti5x
15*16
1201
−
1445
20.32 %
1756
46.21 %
1918
59.70 %
1377
14.65 %
1592
32.56 %
1363
13.49 %
1306
8.74 %
seti5xx
15*17
1199
−
1517
26.52 %
1731
44.37 %
1700
41.78 %
1377
14.85 %
1592
32.78 %
1344
12.09 %
1311
9.34 %
seti5xxx
15*18
1197
−
1590
32.83 %
1755
46.62 %
1852
54.72 %
1373
14.70 %
1592
33.00 %
1340
11.95 %
1311
9.52 %
seti5xy
15*17
1136
−
1404
23.59 %
1732
52.46 %
1728
52.11 %
1299
14.35 %
1438
26.58 %
1271
11.88 %
1230
8.27 %
seti5xyz
15*18
1125
−
1464
30.13 %
1732
53.96 %
1592
41.51 %
1250
11.11 %
1298
15.38 %
1254
11.47 %
1252
11.29 %
seti5c12
15*16
1174
−
1523
29.73 %
1953
66.35 %
1899
61.75 %
1390
18.40 %
1467
24.96 %
1346
14.65 %
1287
9.63 %
seti5cc
15*17
1136
−
1436
26.41 %
1732
52.46 %
1921
69.10 %
1299
14.35 %
1438
26.58 %
1271
11.88 %
1259
10.83 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
17 

by IJA’s 3.90 %. In comparison, the average gaps for the remaining 
methods were as follows: FIFO (17.38 %), MWKR (26.60 %), and 
MOPNR (26.47 %), Song et al. (2023) (11.02 %), Lei et al. (2022) (16.51 
%), and Yuan et al. (2024) (12.13 %). For the Hurink (edata) dataset, the 
MAMHSAN shows an average gap of 9.24 %, again only falling short of 
IJA’s 4.60 %. The average gaps for the other methods were as follows: 
FIFO (19.89 %), MWKR (44.68 %), and MOPNR (43.67 %), Song et al. 
(2023) (16.66 %), Lei et al. (2022) (23.01 %), and Yuan et al. (2024)
(15.54 %). In the case of the Hurink (vdata) dataset, the MAMHSAN 
records an average gap of 1.63 %, which is only exceeded by 2SGA’s 
0.39 %. The average gaps for the rest of the methods were as follows: 
FIFO (7.14 %), MWKR (8.96 %), and MOPNR (13.14 %), Song et al. 
(2023) (4.41 %), Lei et al. (2022) (6.96 %), and Yuan et al. (2024) (5.37 
%). Among these metaheuristic methods, IJA and RegGA exhibit 
average gaps of 2.70 % and 3.20 %, respectively. Overall, DRL-based 
methods significantly outperform PDR methods in the Hurink (rdata) 
and Hurink (edata) datasets. The MAMHSAN ranks as the best among 
other DRL-based methods, followed by IJA and 2SGA. However, it is 
important to note that these methods typically require substantial 
computational time. In contrast, PDR methods require the least time and 
demonstrate good applicability. These DRL-based methods occupy the 
middle ground, often achieving high levels of performance within 
acceptable runtimes.
Among all DRL-based methods, Yuan et al. (2024) achieve the 
shortest processing time due to their use of a lightweight MLP to extract 
the states from scheduling environments. In contrast, Song et al. (2023)
employ the HGNN approach to extract features from the decision- 
making environment, while Lei et al. (2022) utilize multiple actions to 
make decisions for FJSP, resulting in relatively longer processing times 
for both. The MAMHSAN employs the MHSAN to extract features from 
the scheduling environment and incorporates multi-agents for joint 
decision-making. Consequently, the solution time of the MAMHSAN 
falls between those of Song et al. (2023) and Lei et al. (2022). However, 
objectively speaking, there is little overall difference in solution time, 
and high-quality solutions can be obtained within an acceptable time­
frame. To gain a clearer understanding of the algorithm’s performance 
across various datasets, we compare the FIFO, MWKR, and MOPNR 
methods of the PDRs with the methods proposed by (Song et al., 2023), 
(Lei et al., 2022), and (Yuan et al., 2024) within the DRL framework, as 
well as the average gap of these methods across different datasets. These 
comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 10, which indicates that DRL-based 
methods demonstrate a stronger generalization ability than PDR-type 
methods across all datasets. Furthermore, among all the algorithms 
examined, the MAMHSAN exhibits the strongest generalization capa­
bility and the highest solution quality. Specifically, the performance of 
different algorithms in solving each instance for every dataset is 
analyzed in the following subsections.
5.2.3. Experimental results on the Barnes dataset
For the Barnes dataset, we selected all 21 instances as the verification 
Fig. 11. Relative gaps of MAMHSAN against SOTA methods from baselines on public datasets.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
18 

set. The scales of these instances include 10 × 11, 10 × 12, 10 × 13, 10 ×
14, 15 × 12, 15 × 13, 15 × 16, 15 × 17, and 15 × 18, respectively. In the 
experiment, we employed a policy network trained on random instances 
of a 10 × 5 scale to address these FJSP instances. To ensure fairness 
across all DRL-based methods, we utilized a greedy strategy to obtain the 
final results. Additionally, we applied three PDR methods—FIFO, 
MWKR, and MOPNR—to solve all FJSP instances. Table 8 presents the 
exact results of all PDR methods and DRL-based methods for each 
calculation example in the Barnes dataset. Furthermore, to provide a 
more intuitive comparison of solution quality across different algo­
rithms, we used the results from the exact method (i.e., Google OR- 
Tools) as optimal results for specific instances. This was combined 
with the calculation method of RPD as outlined in Eq. (31) to compare 
the performance differences of each algorithm on each instance. In the 
following tables, we denote these values as ’gap’.
As shown in Table 8, the MAMHSAN outperforms other comparative 
algorithms across almost all instances within the Barnes dataset. Spe­
cifically, for the PDR methods, the gap distribution range for the FIFO 
method across all instances is between 19.56 % and 36.82 %, while the 
MWKR method exhibits a gap distribution range of 23.19 % to 83.87 %, 
and the MOPNR method ranges from 38.59 % to 69.1 %. Among these 
PDR methods, FIFO demonstrates superior generalization within the 
Barnes dataset. For the DRL-based methods, the gap distribution range 
for the Song et al. (2023) across all instances is 11.11 % to 29.96 %, the 
range for Lei et al. (2022) is 15.38 % to 39.32 %, and the range for Yuan 
et al. (2024) is 9.24 % to 20.43 %. In contrast, the gap distribution range 
for the MAMHSAN across all instances is 7.69 % to 14.08 %. To enhance 
the clarity and intuitiveness regarding the differences among different 
algorithms, we display the distribution of gaps for each algorithm, as 
shown in Fig. 11 (a). The median solution quality for these methods: 
FIFO (28.18 %), MWKR (52.64 %), and MOPNR (49.94 %), Song et al. 
(2023) (18.01 %), Lei et al. (2022) (29.81 %), and Yuan et al. (2024)
(12.43 %), MAMHSAN (11.29 %). By integrating the findings presented 
in Table 7, which compares the average gap and average time across 
different public datasets and various baseline approaches. From Fig. 11
(a), it is evident that the method proposed by Yuan et al. (2024) and this 
study exhibit a stronger generalization ability on the Barnes dataset. In 
terms of solution quality, our proposed MAMHSAN significantly out­
performs all comparative algorithms.
5.2.4. Experimental results on the Brandimarte dataset
In this subsection, we utilize the typical FJSP dataset from Brandi­
marte, specifically selecting all instances (i.e., MK01-MK10) as a verifi­
cation set. The scales of these public instances include 10 × 6, 10 × 10, 
15 × 4, 15 × 8, 20 × 5, 20 × 10, and 20 × 15, respectively. For the 
following experiments, we employed a policy network trained on 
random instances of the 20 × 10 scale to address these FJSP instances. 
To ensure fairness, we adopted a greedy strategy for obtaining the final 
results across all DRL-based methods. Additionally, we implemented 
three PDRs, i.e., FIFO, MWKR, and MOPNR, to solve all FJSP instances. 
Table 9 presents the exact results of all PDRs and DRL-based methods for 
each instance in the Barnes dataset. Furthermore, to provide a clearer 
comparison of the solution quality derived from different algorithms, we 
used the results obtained from Google OR-Tools as the optimal results 
for instances of different sizes. All comparison analyses are the same as 
in subsection 5.2.3. As shown in Table 9, the MAMHSAN outperforms 
other algorithms across all instances of the Brandimarte dataset. Spe­
cifically, for PDR methods, the gap distribution range for the FIFO 
method in all instances is between 0.49 % and 65.38 %, while the MWKR 
method exhibits a gap distribution range of 2.94 % to 93.1 %, and the 
MOPNR method ranges from 14.71 % to 96.55 %. Among these PDR 
methods, FIFO demonstrates superior generalization in the Brandimarte 
dataset. For the DRL-based method, the gap distribution range across all 
instances for the Song et al. (2023) dataset is 0.0 % to 77.59 %, for Lei 
et al. (2022) it is 0.0 % to 36.21 %, and for Yuan et al. (2024) it is 0.19 % 
to 30.0 %. In contrast, the gap distribution range of the MAMHSAN 
Table 9 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Brandimarte.
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
mk01
10*6
40
−
49
22.50 %
51
27.50 %
57
42.50 %
49
22.50 %
47
17.50 %
44
10.00 %
40
0.00 %
mk02
10*6
26
−
43
65.38 %
41
57.69 %
41
57.69 %
43
65.38 %
30
15.38 %
31
19.23 %
28
7.69 %
mk03
15*8
204
−
205
0.49 %
210
2.94 %
234
14.71 %
216
5.88 %
204
0.00 %
211
3.43 %
204
0.00 %
mk04
15*8
60
−
78
30.00 %
99
65.00 %
90
50.00 %
75
25.00 %
76
26.67 %
78
30.00 %
67
11.67 %
mk05
15*4
173
−
184
6.36 %
202
16.76 %
211
21.97 %
190
9.83 %
178
2.89 %
183
5.78 %
176
1.73 %
mk06
10*10
58
−
92
58.62 %
112
93.10 %
114
96.55 %
103
77.59 %
79
36.21 %
74
27.59 %
69
18.97 %
mk07
20*5
144
−
214
48.61 %
215
49.31 %
219
52.08 %
212
47.22 %
152
5.56 %
156
8.33 %
144
0.00 %
mk08
20*10
523
−
541
3.44 %
579
10.71 %
631
20.65 %
523
0.00 %
541
3.44 %
524
0.19 %
523
0.00 %
mk09
20*10
307
−
350
14.01 %
384
25.08 %
397
29.32 %
349
13.68 %
335
9.12 %
326
6.19 %
308
0.33 %
mk10
20*15
198
−
278
40.40 %
291
46.97 %
294
48.48 %
264
33.33 %
236
19.19 %
241
21.72 %
212
7.07 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
19 

across all instances is 0.0 % to 18.97 %. Notably, for the instances MK01, 
MK03, MK07, and MK08, we obtained results identical to those pro­
duced by the exact method, i.e., Google OR-Tools. The Gantt charts for 
MK01, MK03, and MK08 are displayed in Figs. 13, 14, and 15, respec­
tively. In Fig. 12 and Fig. 14, the dotted lines and green arrows indicate 
that the DDT agent transfers T(t) to the Tʹ(t) during the decision-making 
process. The results presented in the Gantt charts demonstrate that, 
through the effective collaboration of both DDT agent and SSA agent, 
the MAMHSAN achieved the best solutions for MK01 and MK03. In 
contrast, the final results for MK08, illustrated in Fig. 14, reveal that the 
Fig. 12. Gantt chart of the results of the MAMHSAN on Brandimarte’s MK01.
Fig. 13. Gantt chart of the results of the MAMHSAN on Brandimarte’s MK03.
Fig. 14. Gantt chart of the results of the MAMHSAN on Brandimarte’s MK08.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
20 

lengthy overall processing time made it impractical to display the 
decision-making process of the DDT agent in the figure. Interested 
readers can access the specific scheduling results via the source code 
provided. It is noteworthy that Lei et al. (2022) and Song et al. (2023)
also obtained solutions of comparable quality for MK03 and MK08; 
however, they were unable to achieve the same results as our study for 
MK01, MK03, MK07, and MK08 simultaneously. This discrepancy un­
derscores the effectiveness of the MAMHSAN and its strong optimization 
capabilities, indicating that the MD-MDP significantly enhances solution 
quality.
To enhance the clarity and intuitiveness regarding the differences 
among different algorithms, we display the distribution of gaps for each 
algorithm in Fig. 11 (b). The median solution quality for the methods: 
FIFO (26.25 %), MWKR (37.23 %), and MOPNR (45.49 %), Song et al. 
(2023) (23.26 %), Lei et al. (2022) (12.25 %), and Yuan et al. (2024)
(9.17 %), MAMHSAN (1.03 %), respectively. Notably, on the Brandi­
marte dataset, the DRL-based methods demonstrate superior perfor­
mance compared to the PDR methods, exhibiting enhanced overall 
generalization ability as well. Among all DRL-based methods analyzed, 
the MAMHSAN leads in both generalization ability and solution quality.
5.2.5. Experimental results on the Dauzere dataset
For the Dauzere dataset, we selected all 18 calculation instances 
(01a-18a) as the verification set. The scales of these FJSP instances 
include 10 × 5, 10 × 8, and 20 × 10, respectively. In the experiment, we 
employed a policy network trained on random instances of the 15 × 10 
scale to address these FJSP instances. To ensure fairness across all DRL- 
based methods, we utilized the greedy strategy to obtain the final re­
sults. Additionally, we applied three PDR methods (FIFO, MWKR, and 
MOPNR) to solve all instances for FJSP. Table 10 presents the results of 
these PDRs and DRL-based methods for each instance in the Barnes 
dataset. To provide a clearer view of the differences in solution quality 
among various algorithms, we employed the results from Google OR- 
Tools as the optimal results for specific instances. The comparisons for 
each algorithm across the instances are the same as in subsection 5.2.3. 
As illustrated in Table 10, the MAMHSAN outperforms other algorithms 
across all instances of the Dauzere dataset. Specifically, for the PDR 
methods, the gap distribution range for the FIFO method spans from 
5.03 % to 34.69 %, while the MWKR method ranges from 6.51 % to 
58.91 %, and the MOPNR method ranges from 13.3 % to 67.02 %. 
Among these PDR methods, the FIFO demonstrates superior general­
ization on the Dauzere dataset. For DRL-based methods, the gap distri­
bution range for Song et al. (2023) is from 1.2 % to 1.19 %, for Lei et al. 
(2022) is from 6.15 % to 26.87 %, and for Yuan et al. (2024) it ranges 
from 1.62 % to 23.52 %. In contrast, the gap distribution range for the 
MAMHSAN is from −0.84 % to 14.02 %. Notably, the MAMHSAN ach­
ieved results that surpassed the Google OR-Tools in instances 12a and 
18a, with gaps of −0.1 % and −0.84 %, respectively, thereby signifi­
cantly demonstrating the effectiveness and optimization capabilities of 
the MAMHSAN. Fig. 15 presents the Gantt chart results for instance 18a. 
Due to its lengthy processing time, the decision-making of the DDT agent 
depicted in the figure is challenging to display. Interested readers can 
access detailed scheduling results through the provided source code. To 
enhance the clarity and intuitiveness regarding the differences among 
different algorithms, we display the distribution of gaps for each algo­
rithm in Fig. 11 (c). The median solution quality for methods: FIFO 
(11.11 %), MWKR (21.44 %), and MOPNR (28.91 %), Song et al. (2023)
(6.92 %), Lei et al. (2022) (14.76 %), and Yuan et al. (2024) (8.51 %), 
MAMHSAN (4.02 %). By considering the results from Table 10 and 
Fig. 11 (c), it is evident that the method proposed by Yuan et al. (2024), 
along with the MAMHSAN presented in this study, demonstrates supe­
rior generalization ability on the Dauzere dataset. Furthermore, in terms 
of solution quality, the algorithms introduced in this study significantly 
outperform all comparative algorithms.
5.2.6. Experimental results on the Hurink dataset
In this subsection, three sub-datasets were selected from the Hurink 
dataset, each exhibiting unique characteristics, namely edata, rdata, and 
vdata. In edata, the characteristics include a limited number of opera­
tions that can be assigned to various machines, whereas rdata allows 
most operations to be assigned to a small number of different machines. 
In contrast, the vdata enables each operation to be assigned to multiple 
machines. For these three sub-datasets, we selected the calculation in­
stances la1-la40 contained within them as the verification set. The scales 
of the instances include 10 × 5, 10 × 10 15 × 5, 15 × 10 15 × 15, 20 × 5, 
20 × 10 and 30 × 10. In the following experiment, we utilized a policy 
network trained on random instances of sizes 10 × 5 and 15 × 10 to 
address these FJSP instances. To ensure fairness, we employed a greedy 
strategy to obtain the final results for all DRL-based methods. Addi­
tionally, we applied the same FIFO, MWKR, and MOPNR to solve all 
FJSP instances. Tables 11, 12, and 13 present the results of both PDR 
methods and DRL-based methods for each calculation instance across 
this sub-dataset. Furthermore, we utilized the results from Google OR- 
Tools as the baselines for each specific instance. The comparisons for 
algorithms across instances are consistent with those in subsection 5.2.3. 
As shown in Table 11, the MAMHSAN significantly outperforms all PDRs 
and DRL-based methods on the edata sub-dataset from the Hurink 
dataset. For the PDR methods, the gap distribution range of the FIFO 
Fig. 15. Gantt chart of the results of the MAMHSAN on Dauzere’s 18a.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
21 

across all instances is between 1.68 % and 39.91 %, and MWKR exhibits 
a gap distribution range of 23.65 % to 67.99 %, and MOPNR ranges from 
14.65 % to 79.64 %. Among these PDRs, FIFO demonstrates superior 
generalization for the edata sub-dataset. Notably, the results of the FIFO 
on the instance la06 within the edata sub-dataset surpass those of all 
other methods. For the DRL-based methods, the gap distribution range 
across all instances for the Song et al. (2023) method is 1.96 % to 37.73 
%, for the Lei et al. (2022) method it is 4.81 % to 40.96 %, and for the 
Yuan et al. (2024) method it is 2.31 % to 23.51 %. In contrast, the gap 
distribution range for the MAMHSAN across all instances is 1.98 % to 
18.03 %. To enhance the clarity regarding the differences among 
different algorithms, we display the distribution of gaps for each algo­
rithm in Fig. 11 (d). The median solution quality for the methods is as 
follows: FIFO (20.35 %), MWKR (46.62 %), and MOPNR (45.64 %), 
Song et al. (2023) (17.3 %), Lei et al. (2022) (23.38 %), and Yuan et al. 
(2024) (17.04 %), MAMHSAN (9.06 %). It is evident that the MAMHSAN 
exhibits significantly better generalization ability compared to the other 
algorithms, and in terms of solution quality, it consistently outperforms 
almost all instances.
As depicted in Table 12, these results on the sub-dataset rdata from 
the Hurink dataset demonstrate that the MAMHSAN outperforms both 
the PDR and DRL-based methods in most instances. For the PDR 
methods, the gap distribution range for the FIFO method across all in­
stances spans from 4.86 % to 48.03 %, while the MWKR method ranges 
from 7.9 % to 48.17 %, and the MOPNR method extends from 6.13 % to 
57.79 %. Notably, among these PDR methods, FIFO exhibits superior 
generalization in solving the sub-dataset rdata. In contrast, for the DRL- 
based methods, the gap distribution ranges across all instances are as 
follows: for Song et al. (2023), 2.24 % to 26.29 %; for Lei et al. (2022), 
1.52 % to 38.08 %; and for Yuan et al. (2024), 1.25 % to 25.66 %. The 
gap distribution range for the MAMHSAN across all instances is notably 
narrower, at 0.77 % to 17.5 %. To enhance the clarity and intuitiveness 
regarding the differences among different algorithms, we display the 
distribution of gaps for each algorithm in Fig. 11 (e). The median so­
lution quality for the methods: FIFO (15.9 %), MWKR (25.79 %), and 
MOPNR (27.63 %), Song et al. (2023) (10.65 %), Lei et al. (2022) (16.77 
%), and Yuan et al. (2024) (11.39 %), MAMHSAN (7.79 %). It is 
observed that MAMHSAN exhibits superiority with a more concentrated 
overall solution quality compared to all other algorithms.
As revealed in Table 13, for the sub-dataset vdata of the Hurink 
dataset, MAMHSAN significantly outperforms all PDR and DRL-based 
methods in almost all results, with only a few exceptions. For the PDR 
methods, the gap distribution ranges are as follows: the FIFO method 
exhibits a range of 0.95 % to 23.81 %, MWKR ranges from 1.05 % to 
26.48 %, and MOPNR displays a range of 1.26 % to 34.35 %. Among 
these PDRs, FIFO demonstrates superior generalization within the sub- 
dataset vdata. In terms of the DRL-based methods, the gap distribution 
ranges are: Song et al. (2023) ranges from 0.0 % to 10.36 %, Lei et al. 
(2022) from 1.6 % to 23.19 %, and Yuan et al. (2024) from 0 % to 14.88 
%. In contrast, MAMHSAN achieves a distribution range of 0.0 % to 6.5 
% across all instances. Notably, the MAMHSAN produced superior re­
sults on la16, la17, la18, la20, la38, and la40, similar to those obtained 
by using Google OR-Tools. To enhance the clarity and intuitiveness 
regarding the differences among different algorithms, we display the 
distribution of gaps for each algorithm in Fig. 11 (f). The median solu­
tion quality for these methods is as follows: FIFO (6.63 %), MWKR (8.14 
%), and MOPNR (11.56 %), Song et al. (2023) (3.84 %), Lei et al. (2022)
(5.93 %), and Yuan et al. (2024) (4.17 %), MAMHSAN (1.19 %). It is 
concluded that the MAMHSAN exhibits better generalization ability and 
solution stability than all comparative algorithms and provides a more 
concentrated quality distribution of solutions. As indicated in Table 13, 
it has consistently achieved the best results across all instances with 
different scales, corroborated by the same results obtained from Google 
OR-Tools, which thoroughly demonstrates the optimization capability of 
the MAMHSAN.
Table 10 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Dauzere.
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
01a
10*5
2518
−
3138
24.62 %
3352
33.12 %
3545
40.79 %
2847
13.07 %
3109
23.47 %
2947
17.04 %
2754
9.37 %
02a
10*5
2231
−
2416
8.29 %
2753
23.40 %
3084
38.23 %
2478
11.07 %
2603
16.67 %
2495
11.83 %
2390
7.13 %
03a
10*5
2229
−
2359
5.83 %
2456
10.18 %
2650
18.89 %
2294
2.92 %
2366
6.15 %
2320
4.08 %
2258
1.30 %
04a
10*5
2503
−
3109
24.21 %
3188
27.37 %
3551
41.87 %
2856
14.10 %
3093
23.57 %
3037
21.33 %
2681
7.11 %
05a
10*5
2216
−
2525
13.94 %
2684
21.12 %
2887
30.28 %
2473
11.60 %
2573
16.11 %
2496
12.64 %
2348
5.96 %
06a
10*5
2203
−
2410
9.40 %
2478
12.48 %
2496
13.30 %
2262
2.68 %
2508
13.84 %
2286
3.77 %
2211
0.36 %
07a
15*8
2283
−
2897
26.89 %
3628
58.91 %
3813
67.02 %
2736
19.84 %
2857
25.14 %
2820
23.52 %
2603
14.02 %
08a
15*8
2069
−
2321
12.18 %
2622
26.73 %
2639
27.55 %
2191
5.90 %
2386
15.32 %
2259
9.18 %
2163
4.54 %
09a
15*8
2066
−
2170
5.03 %
2313
11.96 %
2391
15.73 %
2097
1.50 %
2209
6.92 %
2155
4.31 %
2078
0.58 %
10a
15*8
2291
−
2786
21.61 %
3386
47.80 %
3501
52.82 %
2635
15.02 %
2805
22.44 %
2721
18.77 %
2593
13.18 %
11a
15*8
2063
−
2401
16.38 %
2512
21.76 %
2804
35.92 %
2227
7.95 %
2356
14.20 %
2206
6.93 %
2135
3.49 %
12a
15*8
2034
−
2203
8.31 %
2228
9.54 %
2424
19.17 %
2090
2.75 %
2186
7.47 %
2157
6.05 %
2032
¡0.10 %
13a
20*10
2260
−
3044
34.69 %
3320
46.90 %
3500
54.87 %
2739
21.19 %
2811
24.38 %
2755
21.90 %
2505
10.84 %
14a
20*10
2167
−
2347
8.31 %
2510
15.83 %
2660
22.75 %
2218
2.35 %
2353
8.58 %
2277
5.08 %
2214
2.17 %
15a
20*10
2167
−
2325
7.29 %
2308
6.51 %
2471
14.03 %
2193
1.20 %
2385
10.06 %
2202
1.62 %
2170
0.14 %
16a
20*10
2255
−
2821
25.10 %
3336
47.94 %
3313
46.92 %
2723
20.75 %
2861
26.87 %
2680
18.85 %
2522
11.84 %
17a
20*10
2141
−
2356
10.04 %
2481
15.88 %
2653
23.91 %
2224
3.88 %
2365
10.46 %
2309
7.85 %
2169
1.31 %
18a
20*10
2137
−
2308
8.00 %
2289
7.11 %
2458
15.02 %
2185
2.25 %
2363
10.58 %
2216
3.70 %
2119
¡0.84 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
22 

Table 11 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Hurink (edata).
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
la01
10*5
609
−
722
18.56 %
866
42.20 %
882
44.83 %
688
12.97 %
712
16.91 %
658
8.05 %
639
4.93 %
la02
10*5
655
−
797
21.68 %
982
49.92 %
992
51.45 %
851
29.92 %
875
33.59 %
809
23.51 %
692
5.65 %
la03
10*5
550
−
691
25.64 %
692
25.82 %
988
79.64 %
657
19.45 %
714
29.82 %
660
20.00 %
600
9.09 %
la04
10*5
568
−
664
16.90 %
872
53.52 %
836
47.18 %
660
16.20 %
711
25.18 %
669
17.78 %
641
12.85 %
la05
10*5
503
−
593
17.89 %
737
46.52 %
599
19.09 %
530
5.37 %
621
23.46 %
593
17.89 %
520
3.38 %
la06
15*5
833
−
847
1.68 %
1030
23.65 %
955
14.65 %
926
11.16 %
946
13.57 %
951
14.17 %
870
4.44 %
la07
15*5
762
−
969
27.17 %
1065
39.76 %
1063
39.50 %
910
19.42 %
1010
32.55 %
896
17.59 %
844
10.76 %
la08
15*5
845
−
949
12.31 %
1267
49.94 %
1162
37.51 %
969
14.67 %
932
10.30 %
947
12.07 %
867
2.60 %
la09
15*5
878
−
934
6.38 %
1229
39.98 %
1085
23.58 %
1046
19.13 %
964
9.79 %
946
7.74 %
913
3.99 %
la10
15*5
866
−
934
7.85 %
1167
34.76 %
1032
19.17 %
883
1.96 %
1016
17.32 %
886
2.31 %
885
2.19 %
la11
20*5
1103
−
1190
7.89 %
1451
31.55 %
1274
15.50 %
1172
6.26 %
1285
16.50 %
1213
9.97 %
1144
3.72 %
la12
20*5
960
−
1032
7.50 %
1282
33.54 %
1154
20.21 %
1001
4.27 %
1143
19.06 %
1065
10.94 %
979
1.98 %
la13
20*5
1053
−
1150
9.21 %
1392
32.19 %
1270
20.61 %
1215
15.38 %
1181
12.16 %
1164
10.54 %
1103
4.75 %
la14
20*5
1123
−
1306
16.30 %
1447
28.85 %
1487
32.41 %
1191
6.06 %
1177
4.81 %
1234
9.88 %
1160
3.29 %
la15
20*5
1111
−
1308
17.73 %
1541
38.70 %
1389
25.02 %
1301
17.10 %
1362
22.59 %
1297
16.74 %
1204
8.37 %
la16
10*10
892
−
1087
21.86 %
1351
51.46 %
1414
58.52 %
1059
18.72 %
1046
17.26 %
1051
17.83 %
973
9.08 %
la17
10*10
707
−
813
14.99 %
1039
46.96 %
1016
43.71 %
781
10.47 %
949
34.23 %
773
9.34 %
786
11.17 %
la18
10*10
842
−
952
13.06 %
1089
29.33 %
1153
36.94 %
944
12.11 %
970
15.20 %
934
10.93 %
911
8.19 %
la19
10*10
796
−
981
23.24 %
1100
38.19 %
1234
55.03 %
950
19.35 %
1001
25.75 %
972
22.11 %
868
9.05 %
la20
10*10
857
−
1102
28.59 %
1317
53.68 %
1199
39.91 %
1007
17.50 %
1102
28.59 %
1004
17.15 %
942
9.92 %
la21
15*10
1017
−
1282
26.06 %
1363
34.02 %
1594
56.74 %
1243
22.22 %
1262
24.09 %
1256
23.50 %
1172
15.24 %
la22
15*10
882
−
1234
39.91 %
1310
48.53 %
1208
36.96 %
977
10.77 %
1242
40.82 %
1070
21.32 %
1041
18.03 %
la23
15*10
950
−
1156
21.68 %
1396
46.95 %
1394
46.74 %
1131
19.05 %
1184
24.63 %
1137
19.68 %
1026
8.00 %
la24
15*10
909
−
1186
30.47 %
1527
67.99 %
1360
49.61 %
1112
22.33 %
1204
32.45 %
1086
19.47 %
1040
14.41 %
la25
15*10
941
−
1224
30.07 %
1401
48.88 %
1629
73.11 %
1139
21.04 %
1224
30.07 %
1102
17.11 %
1063
12.96 %
la26
20*10
1125
−
1372
21.96 %
1647
46.40 %
1674
48.80 %
1338
18.93 %
1478
31.38 %
1348
19.82 %
1266
12.53 %
la27
20*10
1186
−
1488
25.46 %
1863
57.08 %
1916
61.55 %
1485
25.21 %
1514
27.66 %
1423
19.98 %
1360
14.67 %
la28
20*10
1149
−
1464
27.42 %
1769
53.96 %
1609
40.03 %
1441
25.41 %
1375
19.67 %
1344
16.97 %
1321
14.97 %
la29
20*10
1118
−
1394
24.69 %
1741
55.72 %
1807
61.63 %
1353
21.02 %
1345
20.30 %
1359
21.56 %
1303
16.55 %
la30
20*10
1204
−
1550
28.74 %
1846
53.32 %
1863
54.73 %
1459
21.18 %
1471
22.18 %
1410
17.11 %
1398
16.11 %
la31
30*10
1539
−
1836
19.30 %
2170
41.00 %
2153
39.90 %
1720
11.76 %
1936
25.80 %
1755
14.04 %
1695
10.14 %
la32
30*10
1698
−
1967
15.84 %
2530
49.00 %
2490
46.64 %
1962
15.55 %
2043
20.32 %
1904
12.13 %
1841
8.42 %
la33
30*10
1547
−
1863
20.43 %
2396
54.88 %
2228
44.02 %
1776
14.80 %
1811
17.07 %
1785
15.38 %
1640
6.01 %
la34
30*10
1604
−
1872
16.71 %
2183
36.10 %
2349
46.45 %
1821
13.53 %
1917
19.51 %
1817
13.28 %
1708
6.48 %
la35
30*10
1736
−
1970
13.48 %
2547
46.72 %
2498
43.89 %
1967
13.31 %
1996
14.98 %
2080
19.82 %
1864
7.37 %
la36
15*15
1162
−
1518
30.64 %
1675
44.15 %
1775
52.75 %
1334
14.80 %
1638
40.96 %
1295
11.45 %
1286
10.67 %
la37
15*15
1397
−
1602
14.67 %
1987
42.23 %
2177
55.83 %
1650
18.11 %
1645
17.75 %
1531
9.59 %
1560
11.67 %
la38
15*15
1144
−
1376
20.28 %
1810
58.22 %
1690
47.73 %
1507
31.73 %
1355
18.44 %
1370
19.76 %
1327
16.00 %
la39
15*15
1184
−
1490
25.84 %
1757
48.40 %
1884
59.12 %
1547
30.66 %
1659
40.12 %
1412
19.26 %
1317
11.23 %
la40
15*15
1150
−
1447
25.83 %
1877
63.22 %
1798
56.35 %
1353
17.65 %
1422
23.65 %
1311
14.00 %
1251
8.78 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
23 

Table 12 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Hurink (rdata).
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
la01
10*5
571
−
689
20.67 %
709
24.17 %
687
20.32 %
616
7.88 %
690
20.84 %
663
16.11 %
595
4.20 %
la02
10*5
530
−
668
26.04 %
694
30.94 %
695
31.13 %
598
12.83 %
648
22.26 %
666
25.66 %
583
10.00 %
la03
10*5
478
−
538
12.55 %
623
30.33 %
565
18.20 %
507
6.07 %
528
10.46 %
525
9.83 %
484
1.26 %
la04
10*5
502
−
601
19.72 %
633
26.10 %
624
24.30 %
533
6.18 %
531
5.78 %
573
14.14 %
531
5.78 %
la05
10*5
457
−
502
9.85 %
540
18.16 %
507
10.94 %
504
10.28 %
516
12.91 %
500
9.41 %
469
2.63 %
la06
15*5
799
−
857
7.26 %
912
14.14 %
848
6.13 %
850
6.38 %
850
6.38 %
856
7.13 %
814
1.88 %
la07
15*5
750
−
798
6.40 %
846
12.80 %
908
21.07 %
787
4.93 %
786
4.80 %
825
10.00 %
772
2.93 %
la08
15*5
765
−
821
7.32 %
960
25.49 %
829
8.37 %
804
5.10 %
803
4.97 %
820
7.19 %
794
3.79 %
la09
15*5
853
−
924
8.32 %
1068
25.21 %
940
10.20 %
875
2.58 %
866
1.52 %
885
3.75 %
873
2.34 %
la10
15*5
804
−
846
5.22 %
973
21.02 %
920
14.43 %
832
3.48 %
885
10.07 %
870
8.21 %
835
3.86 %
la11
20*5
1071
−
1123
4.86 %
1157
8.03 %
1156
7.94 %
1135
5.98 %
1105
3.17 %
1131
5.60 %
1091
1.87 %
la12
20*5
936
−
1004
7.26 %
1050
12.18 %
1086
16.03 %
957
2.24 %
988
5.56 %
977
4.38 %
953
1.82 %
la13
20*5
1038
−
1089
4.91 %
1120
7.90 %
1127
8.57 %
1107
6.65 %
1117
7.61 %
1051
1.25 %
1046
0.77 %
la14
20*5
1070
−
1159
8.32 %
1161
8.50 %
1201
12.24 %
1107
3.46 %
1152
7.66 %
1110
3.74 %
1103
3.08 %
la15
20*5
1090
−
1264
15.96 %
1202
10.28 %
1282
17.61 %
1228
12.66 %
1258
15.41 %
1236
13.39 %
1153
5.78 %
la16
10*10
717
−
913
27.34 %
984
37.24 %
968
35.01 %
794
10.74 %
851
18.69 %
821
14.50 %
786
9.62 %
la17
10*10
646
−
770
19.20 %
794
22.91 %
825
27.71 %
731
13.16 %
892
38.08 %
720
11.46 %
697
7.89 %
la18
10*10
666
−
891
33.78 %
920
38.14 %
888
33.33 %
814
22.22 %
744
11.71 %
766
15.02 %
723
8.56 %
la19
10*10
700
−
882
26.00 %
885
26.43 %
1023
46.14 %
884
26.29 %
952
36.00 %
812
16.00 %
801
14.43 %
la20
10*10
756
−
882
16.67 %
1117
47.75 %
1001
32.41 %
943
24.74 %
964
27.51 %
878
16.14 %
831
9.92 %
la21
15*10
835
−
1055
26.35 %
1096
31.26 %
1146
37.25 %
989
18.44 %
1073
28.50 %
967
15.81 %
966
15.69 %
la22
15*10
760
−
1125
48.03 %
1072
41.05 %
1132
48.95 %
857
12.76 %
1001
31.71 %
893
17.50 %
893
17.50 %
la23
15*10
842
−
1035
22.92 %
1137
35.04 %
1146
36.10 %
956
13.54 %
1066
26.60 %
1010
19.95 %
951
12.95 %
la24
15*10
808
−
1001
23.89 %
1095
35.52 %
1085
34.28 %
958
18.56 %
966
19.55 %
928
14.85 %
913
13.00 %
la25
15*10
791
−
1063
34.39 %
1172
48.17 %
1130
42.86 %
895
13.15 %
964
21.87 %
939
18.71 %
898
13.53 %
la26
20*10
1061
−
1229
15.83 %
1292
21.77 %
1406
32.52 %
1173
10.56 %
1237
16.59 %
1175
10.74 %
1163
9.61 %
la27
20*10
1091
−
1257
15.22 %
1314
20.44 %
1482
35.84 %
1225
12.28 %
1276
16.96 %
1214
11.27 %
1209
10.82 %
la28
20*10
1080
−
1221
13.06 %
1343
24.35 %
1422
31.67 %
1199
11.02 %
1320
22.22 %
1175
8.80 %
1163
7.69 %
la29
20*10
998
−
1250
25.25 %
1387
38.98 %
1273
27.56 %
1101
10.32 %
1219
22.14 %
1111
11.32 %
1080
8.22 %
la30
20*10
1078
−
1230
14.10 %
1361
26.25 %
1382
28.20 %
1227
13.82 %
1371
27.18 %
1275
18.27 %
1193
10.67 %
la31
30*10
1521
−
1644
8.09 %
1829
20.25 %
1840
20.97 %
1591
4.60 %
1624
6.77 %
1636
7.56 %
1569
3.16 %
la32
30*10
1659
−
1824
9.95 %
1913
15.31 %
1931
16.40 %
1798
8.38 %
1849
11.45 %
1765
6.39 %
1735
4.58 %
la33
30*10
1499
−
1605
7.07 %
1891
26.15 %
1700
13.41 %
1568
4.60 %
1663
10.94 %
1542
2.87 %
1559
4.00 %
la34
30*10
1536
−
1702
10.81 %
1747
13.74 %
1767
15.04 %
1577
2.67 %
1599
4.10 %
1686
9.77 %
1577
2.67 %
la35
30*10
1550
−
1737
12.06 %
1773
14.39 %
1764
13.81 %
1692
9.16 %
1706
10.06 %
1706
10.06 %
1629
5.10 %
la36
15*15
1030
−
1320
28.16 %
1372
33.20 %
1411
36.99 %
1296
25.83 %
1296
25.83 %
1229
19.32 %
1162
12.82 %
la37
15*15
1077
−
1299
20.61 %
1488
38.16 %
1528
41.88 %
1210
12.35 %
1285
19.31 %
1294
20.15 %
1177
9.29 %
la38
15*15
962
−
1174
22.04 %
1389
44.39 %
1516
57.59 %
1128
17.26 %
1188
23.49 %
1107
15.07 %
1117
16.11 %
la39
15*15
1024
−
1329
29.79 %
1452
41.80 %
1455
42.09 %
1174
14.65 %
1229
20.02 %
1228
19.92 %
1167
13.96 %
la40
15*15
970
−
1167
20.31 %
1435
47.94 %
1392
43.51 %
1098
13.20 %
1200
23.71 %
1108
14.23 %
1084
11.75 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
24 

Table 13 
Comparison of solution quality accross all methods on Hurink (vdata).
Instances
Size
UB
FIFO
MWKR
MOPNR
Song et al. (2023)
Lei et al. (2022)
Yuan et al. (2024)
Ours
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
Cmax
Gap
la01
10*5
570
−
665
16.67 %
660
15.79 %
642
12.63 %
609
6.84 %
618
8.42 %
612
7.37 %
590
3.51 %
la02
10*5
529
−
565
6.81 %
662
25.14 %
587
10.96 %
582
10.02 %
583
10.21 %
601
13.61 %
548
3.59 %
la03
10*5
477
−
546
14.47 %
544
14.05 %
595
24.74 %
517
8.39 %
533
11.74 %
533
11.74 %
508
6.50 %
la04
10*5
502
−
527
4.98 %
598
19.12 %
659
31.27 %
554
10.36 %
555
10.56 %
556
10.76 %
525
4.58 %
la05
10*5
457
−
492
7.66 %
578
26.48 %
614
34.35 %
493
7.88 %
563
23.19 %
525
14.88 %
486
6.35 %
la06
15*5
799
−
881
10.26 %
890
11.39 %
938
17.40 %
859
7.51 %
837
4.76 %
888
11.14 %
815
2.00 %
la07
15*5
749
−
810
8.14 %
816
8.95 %
811
8.28 %
785
4.81 %
777
3.74 %
802
7.08 %
762
1.74 %
la08
15*5
765
−
830
8.50 %
848
10.85 %
853
11.50 %
805
5.23 %
838
9.54 %
783
2.35 %
785
2.61 %
la09
15*5
853
−
880
3.17 %
931
9.14 %
939
10.08 %
862
1.06 %
891
4.45 %
887
3.99 %
869
1.88 %
la10
15*5
804
−
837
4.10 %
867
7.84 %
871
8.33 %
839
4.35 %
825
2.61 %
843
4.85 %
814
1.24 %
la11
20*5
1071
−
1135
5.98 %
1153
7.66 %
1117
4.30 %
1114
4.01 %
1120
4.58 %
1119
4.48 %
1076
0.47 %
la12
20*5
936
−
970
3.63 %
1015
8.44 %
1014
8.33 %
967
3.31 %
951
1.60 %
977
4.38 %
941
0.53 %
la13
20*5
1038
−
1078
3.85 %
1084
4.43 %
1136
9.44 %
1076
3.66 %
1072
3.28 %
1082
4.24 %
1043
0.48 %
la14
20*5
1070
−
1083
1.21 %
1113
4.02 %
1119
4.58 %
1099
2.71 %
1115
4.21 %
1088
1.68 %
1074
0.37 %
la15
20*5
1089
−
1122
3.03 %
1111
2.02 %
1152
5.79 %
1104
1.38 %
1154
5.97 %
1110
1.93 %
1098
0.83 %
la16
10*10
717
−
809
12.83 %
767
6.97 %
726
1.26 %
753
5.02 %
768
7.11 %
727
1.39 %
717
0.00 %
la17
10*10
646
−
668
3.41 %
659
2.01 %
728
12.69 %
658
1.86 %
700
8.36 %
648
0.31 %
646
0.00 %
la18
10*10
663
−
671
1.21 %
680
2.56 %
704
6.18 %
663
0.00 %
676
1.96 %
663
0.00 %
663
0.00 %
la19
10*10
617
−
675
9.40 %
647
4.86 %
757
22.69 %
654
6.00 %
697
12.97 %
639
3.57 %
624
1.13 %
la20
10*10
756
−
798
5.56 %
766
1.32 %
807
6.75 %
756
0.00 %
772
2.12 %
766
1.32 %
756
0.00 %
la21
15*10
804
−
920
14.43 %
926
15.17 %
1043
29.73 %
839
4.35 %
894
11.19 %
891
10.82 %
814
1.24 %
la22
15*10
736
−
804
9.24 %
817
11.01 %
857
16.44 %
812
10.33 %
834
13.32 %
809
9.92 %
756
2.72 %
la23
15*10
815
−
871
6.87 %
895
9.82 %
957
17.42 %
868
6.50 %
863
5.89 %
872
6.99 %
833
2.21 %
la24
15*10
775
−
865
11.61 %
879
13.42 %
904
16.65 %
803
3.61 %
872
12.52 %
873
12.65 %
805
3.87 %
la25
15*10
756
−
936
23.81 %
877
16.01 %
926
22.49 %
809
7.01 %
893
18.12 %
840
11.11 %
781
3.31 %
la26
20*10
1054
−
1142
8.35 %
1145
8.63 %
1165
10.53 %
1073
1.80 %
1087
3.13 %
1100
4.36 %
1066
1.14 %
la27
20*10
1084
−
1154
6.46 %
1151
6.18 %
1233
13.75 %
1133
4.52 %
1185
9.32 %
1131
4.34 %
1102
1.66 %
la28
20*10
1070
−
1157
8.13 %
1171
9.44 %
1191
11.31 %
1100
2.80 %
1135
6.07 %
1106
3.36 %
1087
1.59 %
la29
20*10
994
−
1091
9.76 %
1178
18.51 %
1138
14.49 %
1027
3.32 %
1088
9.46 %
1076
8.25 %
1009
1.51 %
la30
20*10
1069
−
1143
6.92 %
1223
14.41 %
1215
13.66 %
1106
3.46 %
1138
6.45 %
1143
6.92 %
1091
2.06 %
la31
30*10
1520
−
1605
5.59 %
1591
4.67 %
1618
6.45 %
1565
2.96 %
1596
5.00 %
1575
3.62 %
1529
0.59 %
la32
30*10
1658
−
1705
2.83 %
1737
4.76 %
1781
7.42 %
1714
3.38 %
1733
4.52 %
1726
4.10 %
1675
1.03 %
la33
30*10
1497
−
1541
2.94 %
1588
6.08 %
1574
5.14 %
1529
2.14 %
1554
3.81 %
1531
2.27 %
1513
1.07 %
la34
30*10
1537
−
1583
2.99 %
1582
2.93 %
1645
7.03 %
1574
2.41 %
1588
3.32 %
1594
3.71 %
1546
0.59 %
la35
30*10
1549
−
1620
4.58 %
1600
3.29 %
1681
8.52 %
1612
4.07 %
1596
3.03 %
1575
1.68 %
1564
0.97 %
la36
15*15
948
−
1015
7.07 %
976
2.95 %
1106
16.67 %
993
4.75 %
964
1.69 %
973
2.64 %
952
0.42 %
la37
15*15
986
−
1082
9.74 %
1006
2.03 %
1155
17.14 %
1069
8.42 %
1066
8.11 %
1024
3.85 %
988
0.20 %
la38
15*15
943
−
952
0.95 %
981
4.03 %
1069
13.36 %
945
0.21 %
979
3.82 %
943
0.00 %
943
0.00 %
la39
15*15
922
−
972
5.42 %
1026
11.28 %
1054
14.32 %
951
3.15 %
984
6.72 %
942
2.17 %
935
1.41 %
la40
15*15
955
−
985
3.14 %
965
1.05 %
1066
11.62 %
985
3.14 %
971
1.68 %
967
1.26 %
955
0.00 %
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
25 

6. Conclusion and future work
This study has introduced an innovative multi-agent deep rein­
forcement learning framework that integrates a multi-head self-atten­
tion network (MHSAN) with heterogeneous graph embedding for 
tackling the FJSP. A novel multi-dimensional action and reward Markov 
decision process (MD-MDP) formulation is proposed, representing the 
first MDP modeling method specifically designed for FJSPs through 
multi-action/reward-driven sequential decision model. MD-MDP over­
comes limitations in conventional MDP modeling methods by dynami­
cally adjusting decision time to access high-quality action spaces, 
thereby significantly enhancing scheduling scheme quality for FJSPs. A 
heterogeneous graph-embedded MHSAN is developed for problem- 
specific feature representation and extraction in scheduling environ­
ments, enabling efficient handling of multi-scale FJSPs through the 
concatenation and transformation of multi-modal graph features, while 
capturing critical correlations inherent in the complex constraints of 
FJSPs. Building upon MD-MDP, the multi-agent MHSAN framework 
namely MAMHSAN is presented. In MAMHSAN, DDT agent handles 
decision-time transfers and SAS agent executes joint scheduling actions. 
This promising paradigm for MD-MDP of FJSPs enables efficient 
scheduling optimization in FMS through multi-agent coordinated de­
cisions. Furthermore, an efficient PPO-based multi-agent training 
method is implemented to optimize policy learning, where effective 
reward shaping and experience sharing accelerate convergence while 
preserving policy optimality. Extensive experiments on public datasets 
demonstrate that MAMHSAN has statistically significant superiority in 
solution quality and exploration efficiency against existing state-of-the- 
art methods, with robust generalization capabilities in solving FJSPs 
across diverse scales.
In future work, we will consider using DRL-based methods to solve 
distributed FJSPs and dynamic FJSPs in real-world production envi­
ronments. These problems exhibit considerable complexities due to 
coupling constraints, uncertainties, and dynamic disruptions, thus 
raising two critical challenges: (1) Traditional heterogeneous graphs and 
attention networks still suffer from limitations for extracting enriched 
features and promising patterns from multi-scale instances, resulting in 
developing problem-specific graph representation and feature extrac­
tion for real-time scheduling in dynamic environments are still worthy 
of insightful investigations. (2) Typical single-agent DRL frameworks are 
inadequate for coping with complex and dynamic decision-making re­
quirements, and thus require tailored MDP modeling methods with 
multi-agent collaborative decisions to ensure efficiency and effective­
ness. Addressing these challenges requires pioneering new perspectives 
in developing innovative feature extraction networks with scale- 
independent compatibility and multi-agent coordination mechanisms 
with reward consistency and experience compensation
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Zi-Qi Zhang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, 
Funding acquisition. Tong Huang: Writing – original draft, Software, 
Methodology, Investigation. Bin Qian: Writing – review & editing, 
Methodology, Funding acquisition. Rong Hu: Writing – review & edit­
ing, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition.
Acknowledgments
The authors are sincerely grateful to the anonymous reviewers for 
their insightful comments and suggestions, which greatly improve this 
paper. This work was supported in part by the Youth Project of the 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 72201115), in 
part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 
72561014, U24A20273, and 62173169), in part by the Yunnan Pro­
vincial 
Outstanding 
Youth 
Science 
Foundation 
(Grant 
No. 
202501AW070010), in part by Yunnan Fundamental Research Projects 
(Grant Nos. 202201BE070001-050 and 202301AU070069), in part by 
the Applied Basic Research Key Project of Yunnan (Grant No. 
202201AS070030), and in part by Construction Project of Higher 
Educational Key Laboratory for Industrial Intelligence and Systems of 
Yunnan Province (Grant No. KKPH202403003).
Appendix. Definition of raw feature vectors
At each decision time T(t), the features μi,j of operation Oi,j, features ξi,j,k of original O - M pair, the feature ψk of the machine node in the het­
erogeneous graph and its adjacent node feature λi,j,k, the feature ηt of the action space, and the feature σt of the next decision time are as follows:
For the feature μi,j of the operation Oi,j, it includes the following content:
μ1
i,j: The release time of the job Ji to which the current operation Oi,j belongs.
μ2
i,j: The remaining time until the release of the job Ji to which the current operation Oi,j belongs. If the release time of job Ji is less than or equal to 
the current decision-making time T(t), then μ2
i,j = 0; otherwise, it is calculated using the formula given by Eq. (A.1).
μ3
i,j: The number of operations remaining to be scheduled for the job Ji to which the current operation Oi,j belongs.
μ4
i,j: The number of machines available for processing the current operation Oi,j.
μ5
i,j: The average processing time of the current operation Oi,j across the machine set Mi,j available for processing.
μ6
i,j: The minimum processing time of the current operation Oi,j across the machine set Mi,j available for processing.
μ7
i,j: The number of machines available for processing the next operation Oi,j+1 in sequence after the current operation Oi,j+1.
μ8
i,j: The average processing time of the next operation Oi,j+1 across the machine set Mi,j+1 available for processing.
μ9
i,j: The minimum processing time of the next operation Oi,j+1 across the machine set Mi,j+1 available for processing.
μ10
i,j : The maximum processing time of the next operation Oi,j+1 across the machine set Mi,j+1 available for processing. 
μ2
i,j = T(t) −μ1
i,j
(A.1) 
ψ3
k = T(t) −ψ2
k
(A.2) 
For the adjacent nodes of the machine Mk in the heterogeneous graph, its features ψk include the following:
ψ1
k: The number of operations that have been scheduled on the current machine Mk.
ψ2
k: The release time of the current machine Mk.
ψ3
k: The remaining time until the release of the current machine Mk. If its release time is less than or equal to the current decision time T(t), then 
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
26 

ψ3
k = 0; otherwise, its calculation formula is given by Eq. (A.2).
For the adjacent operation Oi,j nodes of the machine Mk in the heterogeneous graph, their feature λi,j,k are defined as:
λ1
i,j,k: Whether the operation Oi,j has been scheduled. If it has been scheduled, the value is 1; otherwise, it is 0.
λ2
i,j,k: The processing time of operation Oi,j on machine Mk.
λ3
i,j,k: The average processing time of operation Oi,j across the set of machines Mk available for processing.
λ4
i,j,k: The minimum processing time of operation Oi,j across the set of machines Mk available for processing. 
ξ2
i,j,k = max(μ1
i,j, ψ2
k)
(A.3) 
ξ3
i,j,k = ξ2
i,j,k + ξ1
i,j,k
(A.4) 
ξ4
i,j,k = PTi,j,m −min(PTi,j)
(A.5) 
For each O - M pair, its raw characteristic ξi,j,k includes the following:
ξ1
i,j,k: The processing time PTi,j,m of the operation Oi,j in the current combination on machine Mk. If it cannot be processed on machine Mk, the value 
is 0.
ξ2
i,j,k: The earliest start time for the operation Oi,j in the current combination when processed on machine Mk. The calculation method is described in 
Eq. (A.3).
ξ3
i,j,k: The earliest completion time for the operation Oi,j in the current combination when processed on machine Mk. The calculation method is 
described in Eq. (A.4).
ξ4
i,j,k: The difference between the minimum processing time and the current processing time of operation Oi,j. The calculation method is described in 
Eq. (A.5).
Regarding the definition of the action space characteristic ηT, it is as follows:
η1
t : The idle rate of jobs in the current action space.
η2
t : At decision time T(t), the average release time of jobs in the action space.
η3
t : At decision time T(t), the idle rate of machines in the action space.
η4
t : At decision time T(t), the average release time of machines in the action space.
η5
t : At decision time T(t), among the valid actions in the action space, the ratio of the processing time of Oi,j on Mk to the shortest processing time of 
Oi,j.
η6
t : At decision time T(t), the ratio of all actions in the action space that can achieve a shorter processing time at the next decision time Tʹ(t).
η7
t : At decision time T(t), the ratio of all actions in the action space that can achieve the shortest processing time at the next decision time Tʹ(t).
Regarding the characteristics of the next decision time Tʹ(t), it is defined as follows:
σT: The time difference between the current decision time T(t) and the next decision time Tʹ(t), the calculation formula is given by Eq. (A.6). 
σT = T(t) −Tʹ(t)
(A.6) 
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Caldeira, R. H., & Gnanavelbabu, A. (2019). Solving the flexible job shop scheduling 
problem using an improved Jaya algorithm. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 137, 
Article 106064. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106064
Chen, R., Yang, B., Li, S., & Wang, S. (2020). A self-learning genetic algorithm based on 
reinforcement learning for flexible job-shop scheduling problem. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 149, Article 106778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cie.2020.106778
Chen, R., Li, W., & Yang, H. (2023). A deep reinforcement learning framework based on 
an attention mechanism and disjunctive graph embedding for the job-shop 
scheduling problem. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 19, 1322–1331. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3167380
Chiang, T. C., & Fu, L. C. (2007). Using dispatching rules for job shop scheduling with 
due date-based objectives. International Journal of Production Research, 45, 
3245–3262. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207540600786715
Cunha, B., Madureira, A. M., Fonseca, B., & Coelho, D. (2018). (Year). deep 
reinforcement learning as a job shop scheduling solver: A literature review. In Hybrid 
Intelligent Systems: 18th International Conference on Hybrid Intelligent Systems (HIS 
2018) (pp. 350–359). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14347-3_34
Demir, Y., & Kürs¸at ˙Is¸leyen, S. (2013). Evaluation of mathematical models for flexible 
job-shop scheduling problems. Applied Mathematical Modelling, 37, 977–988. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2012.03.020
Doh, H.-H., Yu, J.-M., Kim, J.-S., Lee, D.-H., & Nam, S.-H. (2013). A priority scheduling 
approach for flexible job shops with multiple process plans. International Journal of 
Production Research, 51, 3748–3764. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207543.2013.765074
Gran, S.S., Ismail, I., Ajol, T.A. & Ibrahim, A.F.A. (Year). Mixed Integer programming 
model for flexible job-shop scheduling problem (FJSP) to minimize makespan and 
total machining time. 2015 International Conference on Computer, Communications, 
and Control Technology (I4CT), 413-417. doi:10.1109/I4CT.2015.7219609.
Guo, M.-H., Xu, T.-X., Liu, J.-J., Liu, Z.-N., Jiang, P.-T., Mu, T.-J., Zhang, S.-H., 
Martin, R. R., Cheng, M.-M., & Hu, S.-M. (2022). Attention mechanisms in computer 
vision: A survey. Computational Visual Media, 8, 331–368. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s41095-022-0271-y
Han, X., Cheng, W., Meng, L., Zhang, B., Gao, K., Zhang, C., & Duan, P. (2024). A dual 
population collaborative genetic algorithm for solving flexible job shop scheduling 
problem with AGV. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 86, Article 101538. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.swevo.2024.101538
Han, K., & Gong, W. (2025). Memetic algorithm based on non-dominated levels for 
flexible job shop scheduling problem with learn-forgetting effect and worker 
cooperation. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 200, Article 110845. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cie.2024.110845
Haupt, R. (1989). A survey of priority rule-based scheduling. Operations-Research- 
Spektrum, 11, 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01721162
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature, 521, 436–444. https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
Lei, K., Guo, P., Zhao, W., Wang, Y., Qian, L., Meng, X., & Tang, L. (2022). A multi-action 
deep reinforcement learning framework for flexible Job-shop scheduling problem. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 205, Article 117796. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
eswa.2022.117796
Lei, K., Guo, P., Wang, Y., Zhang, J., Meng, X., & Qian, L. (2024). Large-scale dynamic 
scheduling for flexible job-shop with random arrivals of new jobs by hierarchical 
reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 20, 1007–1018. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2023.3272661
Li, X., Guo, X., Tang, H., Wu, R., Wang, L., Pang, S., Liu, Z., Xu, W., & Li, X. (2022). 
Survey of integrated flexible job shop scheduling problems. Computers Industrial 
Engineering, 174, Article 108786.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
27 

Li, C., Zheng, P., Yin, Y., Wang, B., Wang, L., & Technology. (2023). Deep reinforcement 
learning in smart manufacturing: A review and prospects. Journal of Manufacturing 
Science, 40, 75–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2022.11.003
Liu, R., Piplani, R., & Toro, C. (2022). Deep reinforcement learning for dynamic 
scheduling of a flexible job shop. International Journal of Production Research, 60, 
4049–4069. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2022.2058432
Liu, R., Piplani, R., & Toro, C. (2023). A deep multi-agent reinforcement learning 
approach to solve dynamic job shop scheduling problem. Computers Operations 
Research, 159, Article 106294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2023.106294
Luo, S. (2020). Dynamic scheduling for flexible job shop with new job insertions by deep 
reinforcement learning. Applied Soft Computing, 91, Article 106208. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106208
Luo, Q., Deng, Q., Xie, G., & Gong, G. (2023). A Pareto-based two-stage evolutionary 
algorithm for flexible job shop scheduling problem with worker cooperation 
flexibility. Robotics Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 82, Article 102534. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2023.102534
Luo, S., Zhang, L., & Fan, Y. (2022). Real-time scheduling for dynamic partial-no-wait 
multiobjective flexible job shop by deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on 
Automation Science and Engineering, 19, 3020–3038. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TASE.2021.3104716
Meng, L., Zhang, C., Shao, X., & Ren, Y. (2019). MILP models for energy-aware flexible 
job shop scheduling problem. Journal of Cleaner Production, 210, 710–723. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.11.021
Meng, L., Zhang, C., Shao, X., Zhang, B., Ren, Y., & Lin, W. (2020). More MILP models for 
hybrid flow shop scheduling problem and its extended problems. International 
Journal of Production Research, 58, 3905–3930. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00207543.2019.1636324
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M. G., 
Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A. K., & Ostrovski, G. (2015). Human-level 
control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518, 529–533. https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/nature14236
Munikoti, S., Agarwal, D., Das, L., Halappanavar, M., & Natarajan, B. (2024). Challenges 
and opportunities in deep reinforcement learning with graph neural networks: A 
comprehensive review of algorithms and applications. IEEE Transactions on Neural 
Networks and Learning Systems, 35, 15051–15071. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TNNLS.2023.3283523
Naderi, B., & Roshanaei, V. (2022). Critical-path-search logic-based benders 
decomposition approaches for flexible job shop scheduling. INFORMS Journal on 
Optimization, 4, 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoo.2021.0056
Narassima, M. S., Vasudevan, S. K., & Anbuudayasankar, S. P. (2022). Development of a 
priority dispatching rule and novel production scheduling algorithm for a job shop. 
International Journal of Computer Aided Engineering and Technology, 16, 417–449. 
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJCAET.2022.123989
Pan, Z., Wang, L., Wang, J., & Lu, J. (2023). Deep reinforcement learning based 
optimization algorithm for permutation flow-shop scheduling. IEEE Transactions on 
Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence, 7, 983–994. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TETCI.2021.3098354
Panzer, M., & Bender, B. (2022). Deep reinforcement learning in production systems: A 
systematic literature review. International Journal of Production Research, 60, 
4316–4341. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2021.1973138
Park, J., Chun, J., Kim, S. H., Kim, Y., & Park, J. (2021). Learning to schedule job-shop 
problems: Representation and policy learning using graph neural network and 
reinforcement learning. International Journal of Production Research, 59, 3360–3377. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1870013
Rooyani, D., & Defersha, F. M. (2019). An Efficient Two-Stage Genetic Algorithm for 
Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 52, 2519–2524. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.11.585
Sels, V., Gheysen, N., & Vanhoucke, M. (2012). A comparison of priority rules for the job 
shop scheduling problem under different flow time- and tardiness-related objective 
functions. International Journal of Production Research, 50, 4255–4270. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/00207543.2011.611539
Sharma, V., & Tripathi, A. K. (2022). A systematic review of meta-heuristic algorithms in 
IoT based application. Array, 14, Article 100164. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
array.2022.100164
Sobeyko, O., & M¨onch, L. (2016). Heuristic approaches for scheduling jobs in large-scale 
flexible job shops. Computers & Operations Research, 68, 97–109. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cor.2015.11.004
Song, W., Chen, X., Li, Q., & Cao, Z. (2023). Flexible job-shop scheduling via graph 
neural network and deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Informatics, 19, 1600–1610. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2022.3189725
Sun, K., Zheng, D., Song, H., Cheng, Z., Lang, X., Yuan, W., & Wang, J. (2023). Hybrid 
genetic algorithm with variable neighborhood search for flexible job shop scheduling 
problem in a machining system. Expert Systems with Applications, 215, Article 
119359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119359
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT Press, 
17, 229–235. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0263574799271172
Thenarasu, M., Rameshkumar, K., Rousseau, J., & Anbuudayasankar, S. P. (2022). 
Development and analysis of priority decision rules using MCDM approach for a 
flexible job shop scheduling: A simulation study. Simulation Modelling Practice and 
Theory, 114, Article 102416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2021.102416
Vaswani, A. A. S., Noam, Niki, Parmar, Jakob, Uszkoreit, Jones Llion, N., Aidan, Gomez, 
Ukasz, Kaiser, & Illia, Polosukhin (2017). Attention is all you need. Curran Associates, 
30. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91 
fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Wan, L., Fu, L., Li, C., & Li, K. (2024). Flexible job shop scheduling via deep 
reinforcement learning with meta-path-based heterogeneous graph neural network. 
Knowledge-Based Systems, 296, Article 111940. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
knosys.2024.111940
Wan, L., Fu, L., Li, C., & Li, K. (2025). An effective multi-agent-based graph 
reinforcement learning method for solving flexible job shop scheduling problem. 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 139, Article 109557. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.engappai.2024.109557
Wang, S., & Zhang, H. (2023). A matheuristic for flowshop scheduling with batch 
processing machines in textile manufacturing. Applied Soft Computing, 145, Article 
110594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110594
Witty, S., Lee, J. K., Tosch, E., Atrey, A., Clary, K., Littman, M. L., & Jensen, D. (2021). 
Measuring and characterizing generalization in deep reinforcement learning. Applied 
AI Letters, 2, 45. https://doi.org/10.1002/ail2.45
Wu, K., Huang, E., Wang, M., & Zheng, M. (2022). Job scheduling of diffusion furnaces in 
semiconductor fabrication facilities. European Journal of Operational Research, 301, 
141–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2021.09.044
Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., & Philip, S. Y. (2020). A comprehensive 
survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning 
Systems, 32, 4–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386
Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., & Yu, P. S. (2021). A Comprehensive 
Survey on Graph Neural Networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning 
Systems, 32, 4–24. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386
Xie, J., Gao, L., Peng, K., Li, X., & Li, H. (2019). Review on flexible job shop scheduling. 
IET collaborative intelligent manufacturing, 1, 67–77. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet- 
cim.2018.0009
Xu, Y., Zhang, M., Yang, M., & Wang, D. (2024). Hybrid quantum particle swarm 
optimization and variable neighborhood search for flexible job-shop scheduling 
problem. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 73, 334–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jmsy.2024.02.007
Yang, Y., Song, Y., Guo, W., Lei, Q., Sun, A., & Fan, L. (2023). Guided shuffled frog- 
leaping algorithm for flexible job shop scheduling problem with variable sublots and 
overlapping in operations. Computers Industrial Engineering, 180, Article 109209. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2023.109209
Yang, D., Wu, M., Li, D., Xu, Y., Zhou, X., & Yang, Z. (2022). Dynamic opposite learning 
enhanced dragonfly algorithm for solving large-scale flexible job shop scheduling 
problem. Knowledge-Based Systems, 238, Article 107815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
knosys.2021.107815
Yang, T., Yi, X., Lu, S., Johansson, K. H., & Chai, T. (2021). Intelligent manufacturing for 
the process industry driven by industrial artificial intelligence. Engineering, 7, 
1224–1230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2021.04.023
Yuan, E., Wang, L., Cheng, S., Song, S., Fan, W., & Li, Y. (2024). Solving flexible job shop 
scheduling problems via deep reinforcement learning. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 245, Article 123019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.123019
Zeng, Z., Li, X. & Bai, C. (Year). A Deep Reinforcement Learning Approach to Flexible Job 
Shop Scheduling. 2022 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
(SMC), 884-890. doi:10.1109/SMC53654.2022.9945107.
Zhang, L., Feng, Y., Xiao, Q., Xu, Y., Li, D., Yang, D., & Yang, Z. (2023a). Deep 
reinforcement learning for dynamic flexible job shop scheduling problem 
considering variable processing times. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 71, 
257–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2023.09.009
Zhang, Z.-Q., Li, Y., Qian, B., Hu, R., & Yang, J.-B. (2024b). A multidimensional 
probabilistic model based evolutionary algorithm for the energy-efficient distributed 
flexible job-shop scheduling problem. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 
135, Article 108841. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108841
Zhang, Z.-Q., Qiu, X.-H., Qian, B., Hu, R., Wang, L., & Yang, J.-B. (2025). Knowledge- 
enhanced multidimensional estimation of distribution hyper-heuristic evolutionary 
algorithm for semiconductor final testing scheduling problem. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 260, Article 125424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2024.108841
Zhang, C., Song, W., Cao, Z., Zhang, J., Tan, P. S., & Chi, X. (2020). Learning to dispatch 
for job shop scheduling via deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems, 33, 1621–1632. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/pape 
r_files/paper/2020/file/11958dfee29b6709f48a9ba0387a2431-Paper.pdf.
Zhang, Z.-Q., Wu, F.-C., Qian, B., Hu, R., Wang, L., & Jin, H.-P. (2023c). A Q-learning- 
based hyper-heuristic evolutionary algorithm for the distributed flexible job-shop 
scheduling problem with crane transportation. Expert Systems with Applications, 234, 
Article 121050. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121050
Zhang, W., Zheng, Y., & Ahmad, R. (2023b). An energy-efficient multi-objective 
scheduling for flexible job-shop-type remanufacturing system. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 66, 211–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.12.008
Zhang, W., Zhao, F., Li, Y., Du, C., Feng, X., & Mei, X. (2024a). A novel collaborative 
agent reinforcement learning framework based on an attention mechanism and 
disjunctive graph embedding for flexible job shop scheduling problem. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 74, 329–345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2024.03.012
Zhao, F., He, X., & Wang, L. (2021). A two-stage cooperative evolutionary algorithm with 
problem-specific knowledge for energy-efficient scheduling of no-wait flow-shop 
problem. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, 51, 5291–5303. https://www.ncbi.nlm. 
nih.gov/pubmed/33095728.
Z.-Q. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
Computers & Industrial Engineering 210 (2025) 111466 
28 
