Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Expert Systems With Applications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/eswa
State recommender system for actuator devices in smart homes: Integration 
of deep reinforcement learning and implicit feedback
Denis Robson Dantas Boaventura
a,∗, Eduardo Ferreira da Silva
a, 
Mayki dos Santos Oliveira
a, Diego Corrêa da Silva
b, Frederico Araújo Durão
a
a Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil
b University of Klagenfurt, Carinthia, Klagenfurt, Austria
a r t i c l e  i n f o
Keywords:
Smart homes
Recommender systems
Reinforcement learning
Multi-agent recommender system
Smart environment
Smart device
 
a b s t r a c t
The rapid expansion of the Internet of Things (IoT) has provided the technological foundation for smart homes, in 
which interconnected devices enable the environment to adapt to residents’ needs. Yet, this proliferation of IoT-
enabled devices also introduces a signiﬁcant challenge: managing and coordinating their multiple operational 
states, which extend far beyond a simple “switch on/switch oﬀ”. Aiming to automate the action process and 
anticipate user actions, this study proposes a state recommender system for actuator devices in smart homes, de-
veloped using deep reinforcement learning algorithms integrated with implicit feedback. This approach enables 
composite state encoding and coordination among multiple agents, thereby anticipating user needs and adapting 
to dynamic routines. In addition to using a dataset captured from a real-world IoT environment, we use a smart 
home simulator to generate two datasets based on three diﬀerent routines and perform experiments with two re-
inforcement learning algorithms, Deep Q-Learning and Diﬀerential Semi-gradient n-step SARSA, benchmarking 
their performance against an online Supervised Learning baseline based on Behavior Cloning. Additionally, we 
tested these algorithms using two-state approaches: simple and composite. The results conﬁrm the system’s suc-
cessful adaptation to user routines across both approaches, underscoring its potential to enhance personalization 
in smart home environments.
1.  Introduction
Smart Home (SH) represents a key application domain of the In-
ternet of Things (IoT), where interconnected devices collaborate to en-
hance the quality of life through automation, eﬃciency, and personal-
ization. The IoT, broadly deﬁned as a network of physical objects embed-
ded with sensors, software, and connectivity, enables these devices to 
collect and exchange data, creating responsive and intelligent environ-
ments (Rashdan et al., 2025). Within the SH context, IoT technologies 
facilitate seamless integration among lighting, climate control, security 
systems, appliances, and user interfaces, fostering environments that are 
adaptive to their inhabitants’ habits and preferences. This convergence 
of connectivity and automation not only optimizes energy usage and 
convenience but also introduces new challenges related to system com-
plexity, privacy, and interoperability (Yang et al., 2017).
According to Ashton (1999), the interconnection of (IoT) has driven 
major advances in SHs. Evolving from early device automation toward 
increasingly autonomous environments that must manage sophisticated 
∗Corresponding author.
 
E-mail addresses: denis.boaventura@ufba.br (D.R.D. Boaventura), eduardoferreira@ufba.br (E.F. da Silva), maykioliveira@ufba.br (M. dosS. Oliveira), 
diego.correa@aau.at (D.C. da Silva), fdurao@ufba.br (F.A. Durão).
devices and complex interactions while continuously adapting to resi-
dents’ preferences (Kim et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2017). With the incorpo-
ration of artiﬁcial intelligence, SHs can operate more independently, but 
this autonomy raises challenges in balancing predictability and user con-
trol to avoid compromising users (Davidoﬀ et al., 2006). In this context, 
Recommender Systems (RSs) have emerged as a promising approach 
for leveraging IoT-generated data to deliver personalized suggestions 
and enhance the user experience, making them a key research topic 
in smart environments (Ricci et al., 2022). However, this intersection 
remains immature due to the lack of standardized methodologies and 
public datasets, as well as the limited availability of source code, which 
hinders reproducibility and slows progress in the smart-home ﬁeld (Af-
sar et al., 2022; Himeur et al., 2021).
Conventional RSs, which rely on historical data and pre-established 
behavior patterns, face limitations when applied to dynamic scenarios, 
such as SHs. They struggle to adapt quickly to changes in users’ prefer-
ences, compromising continuous personalization (Zhang et al., 2022). 
Additionally, modeling preferences in real time is challenging, as many 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2026.131805
Received 26 September 2025; Received in revised form 10 February 2026; Accepted 20 February 2026
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
Available online 10 March 2026 
0957-4174/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
systems fail to capture preferences robustly, especially when they rely 
solely on explicit feedback, which has limitations such as users’ reluc-
tance to provide it and its susceptibility to momentary inﬂuences (Ricci 
et al., 2022). Within this gap, integrating Reinforcement Learning (RL) 
into RS for SHs emerges as a promising approach to address these chal-
lenges. This integration enables RSs to operate in real time, leveraging 
both implicit and explicit feedback, and aligning with users’ expecta-
tions for convenience, comfort, and continuous personalization (Sutton 
& Barto, 2018). The application of RL not only fosters more responsive 
interactions between devices and residents, but also meets the demand 
for dynamic systems that continuously adapt to changes in users’ pref-
erences and behaviors, thereby promoting a smoother, more eﬃcient 
experience within SHs.
This work 1 proposes an event-driven RS, based on the integration 
of Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) and implicit feedback to orches-
trate actuator devices in SHs. The research addresses an underdeveloped 
topic with many gaps. The contributions of this work to the state of the 
art are the following:
• A recommendation system for smart homes that models implicit 
feedback and its corresponding reward function to enable au-
tonomous personalization for smart devices.
• An analysis of the adaptability of an on-policy and an oﬀ-policy re-
inforcement learning algorithm applied to the smart home domain.
• Two domain-speciﬁc action selection strategies adapted for rein-
forcement learning systems in environments with the possibility of 
routine change.
• A new metric based on the Hamming Score for evaluating predictions 
for smart devices with a composite state.
Our approach has the potential to overcome the limitations of tradi-
tional recommendation techniques by eﬀectively responding to chang-
ing resident preferences and providing a continuously personalized ex-
perience. This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents related 
work; Section 3 discusses the concepts underlying the main proposal; 
Section 4 details our solution; and Section 5 describes the dataset and 
experimental methodology. Finally, Sections 6 and 7 present a discus-
sion of the results and the ﬁndings.
2.  Related works
This section synthesizes prior research on smart homes and RS, focus-
ing on the diﬀerences in objectives, learning, and assumptions among 
studies. We organize the literature into three thematic groups: energy 
eﬃciency and consumption management; activity modeling, context-
aware automation, and multi-label smart-home prediction; and rein-
forcement learning for recommender systems. Across these works, we 
emphasize recurring dimensions such as optimization goals (energy, se-
curity, comfort), feedback modeling (explicit vs. implicit), decision ca-
dence (periodic vs. event-driven), orchestration scope (single subsystem 
vs. whole-home), and device-state complexity (binary vs. composite).
2.1.  Energy eﬃciency and consumption management
Most recent studies on SHs prioritize energy eﬃciency and consump-
tion management, frequently leveraging RSs to support decision-making 
(Alomar et al., 2022; Asare-Bediako et al., 2013; B et al., 2024; Jiménez-
Bravo et al., 2019; Kaur et al., 2019; Khezzane et al., 2024; Luo et al., 
2021; Rodríguez Fernández et al., 2015). These works diﬀer in how they 
collect and exploit contextual and usage signals: some emphasize real-
time monitoring and responsive control (Alomar et al., 2022), whereas 
others focus on load and price forecasting to guide energy-aware deci-
sions (Jiménez-Bravo et al., 2019). Methodologically, approaches range 
1 Code and datasets for this work: https://github.com/denisbvnt/
Recommender-System-for-Smart-Homes-Based-on-Reinforcement-Learning
from recommendation techniques such as Collaborative Filtering (Luo 
et al., 2021) to Multi-agent System (MAS)-based architectures that coor-
dinate devices and policies in distributed settings (Asare-Bediako et al., 
2013; Kaur et al., 2019). Recent advances also incorporate multi-layer, 
multi-objective optimization to jointly minimize the consumption cost 
and the peak-to-average ratio while maximizing user satisfaction (Khez-
zane et al., 2024). Beyond energy management, security-oriented mech-
anisms, such as user-based ﬁngerprint systems, can indirectly improve 
energy eﬃciency by enabling automated appliance control with diﬀer-
entiated access levels (B et al., 2024).
In a broader scope, Rashdan et al. (2025) integrates remote mon-
itoring, energy management, and user comfort through customizable 
interfaces provided by the Blynk mobile application. Among energy-
focused approaches, Asare-Bediako et al. (2013) is notable for incor-
porating feedback; however, their feedback is delivered to the user to 
increase consumption awareness. In contrast, our work models user ac-
tions as implicit feedback that directly drives the learning process of the 
proposed algorithms. Overall, these studies provide foundational archi-
tectures for deploying RSs in smart environments, informing the system 
design choices in our proposal.
2.2.  Activity modeling, context-aware automation, and multi-label 
smart-home prediction
Related research explores the optimization of automation and inter-
action to enhance convenience and precision in SHs (Cook et al., 2003; 
Jeon et al., 2022). While Jeon et al. (2022) proposes a RS based on 
context-aware encoders that cluster user actions using temporal and se-
quential context, Cook et al. (2003) predicts activities using an ensem-
ble strategy that combines multiple predictors via voting. Complemen-
tarily, da Silva et al. (2025) investigates multi-label learning for SHs, 
emphasizing the challenge of predicting interdependent device states 
and proposing a data transformation methodology aligned with real 
IoT structures. However, unlike our event-driven setting, their model 
is trained on second-by-second data and performs predictions at ﬁxed 
time intervals, which changes the operational assumptions about when 
decisions are triggered and updated. Moreover, although (Jeon et al., 
2022) is closer to our setting as a SH state RS, it does not incorporate 
user feedback as a learning input. In addition, some approaches (e.g., 
Cook et al., 2003; Sun et al., 2025) pursue objectives that diverge from 
our primary focus on event-driven personalization and whole-home ac-
tuator orchestration.
2.3.  Reinforcement learning for recommender systems
Recently, data-driven approaches, including Machine Learning (ML) 
techniques, have transcended their traditional boundaries, demonstrat-
ing remarkable eﬃcacy in solving complex optimization problems 
across a wide spectrum of engineering disciplines. Recent studies have 
highlighted the robust adaptability of these learning-based methods 
in ﬁelds ranging from multidomain nanomaterial design (Wang et al., 
2024) and chemical engineering applications in nanomaterials (Yang 
et al., 2024) to the accelerated discovery and optimization of metal-
organic frameworks (Wang et al., 2025). Following this trend of suc-
cessful deployment in complex dynamic systems, RL has also emerged 
as a promising approach for orchestrating SH environments.
In this context, user–system interaction is inherently sequential, 
which allows recommendation to be framed as a Markov Decision Pro-
cess (MDP) and optimized via RL (Afsar et al., 2022). This formulation 
is particularly suitable for dynamic environments, where RSs must con-
tinuously revise preference estimates and respond to rapidly changing 
routines (Chen et al., 2023). In smart-home contexts, several studies em-
ploy RL to optimize device behavior and improve RSs (CHÉ et al., 2010; 
Gokul et al., 2016; Mirra et al., 2018; Mozer, 1998; Reaz et al., 2008; 
Yu et al., 2020). Their targets range from balancing comfort and en-
ergy savings (including image-based sensing) (Mozer, 1998) to energy 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
2 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
management for Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) and 
Energy Storage System (ESS) systems (Yu et al., 2020) to the automa-
tion of lights and appliances (Mirra et al., 2018). Other works learn 
user interaction patterns (CHÉ et al., 2010), exploit image processing to 
anticipate actions (Gokul et al., 2016), or adopt MAS frameworks to sup-
port interaction prediction and accessibility-oriented automation (Reaz 
et al., 2008).
A key diﬀerentiator across these RL-based systems is how rewards 
and feedback are modeled. For example, Mozer (1998) updates policies 
conditional on non-negative user feedback while encouraging energy-
eﬃcient transitions; Yu et al. (2020) penalizes energy consumption and 
temperature deviation; Mirra et al. (2018) employs binary rewards; 
Gokul et al. (2016) derives rewards from visual environment cues; and 
Reaz et al. (2008) deﬁnes rewards from user feedback. In contrast, our 
proposal utilizes DRL to anticipate users’ future actions and orchestrate 
all home actuators through an event-driven decision-making process. 
Our model explicitly accounts for the complexity of real-world smart de-
vices with composite states (e.g., switch, temperature, color, intensity), 
treats device interactions as implicit feedback, and computes rewards 
for each device-state recommendation to support continual personaliza-
tion under routine changes.
3.  Background
3.1.  Recommender systems
We can deﬁne RSs as software tools and techniques that provide sug-
gestions of items likely to be of interest to a particular user (Ricci et al., 
2022). These suggestions are made by predicting which product or ser-
vice will most please users, based on their preference history. In a RS 
approach, “item” is a generic term denoting what the system suggests 
to a user, “user” is a generic term for whom the system provides rec-
ommended items, and “interactions” are records of users’ actions and 
behaviors toward items, including purchases, browsing, clicks, ratings, 
along with contextual data (such as time and location) (Ricci et al., 
2022).
During user sessions with the system, interactions are recorded and 
serve as the database for user modeling. According to Ricci et al. (2022), 
two main techniques can be adopted to collect user data on the items 
they interact with: in most interactions, users may either interact pos-
itively or negatively with items. In this context, implicit feedback is 
particularly valuable in SH environments. Users rarely provide explicit 
ratings for system actions. Instead, their preferences are reﬂected in op-
erational patterns, such as adjusting thermostat settings, turning lights 
“on” or “oﬀ”, or changing appliance modes.
3.2.  Deep reinforcement learning algorithms
According to Sutton and Barto (2018), RL concerns learning a pol-
icy that maps situations to actions to maximize a numerical reward 
over time through interaction with an environment. DRL extends this 
paradigm by using deep neural networks to approximate value func-
tions and/or policies, enabling learning in complex, high-dimensional 
settings with large state and action spaces. A SH environment ﬁts these 
characteristics, featuring a variety of smart devices with states compris-
ing multiple attributes. There are numerous DRL algorithms, each bet-
ter suited for solving speciﬁc types of problems. We will use the Deep 
Q-Learning (DQL) and Diﬀerential Semi-gradient n-step SARSA (DSGn-
SARSA) algorithms, as they possess distinct characteristics that enable 
a comparison between on-policy and oﬀ-policy methods, providing a 
comprehensive performance analysis across diﬀerent contexts.
In this work, for both DQL and DSGnSARSA, we use the same neural 
network architecture as a function approximator. The network employs 
an input layer that receives the Environment state 𝑆, followed by three 
hidden layers (64-128-64 neurons) with Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) 
activation function. The output layer is dynamic and represents the ac-
tions the agent can take, expanding as the action space grows.
3.2.1.  Deep Q-learning
DQL is an oﬀ-policy algorithm that uses neural networks as a non-
linear function approximator in Q-Learning (Mnih et al., 2013). This al-
gorithm employs two distinct policies: a behavior policy for exploration 
and a target policy for updates, both implemented as neural networks. 
The method addresses two fundamental challenges: 1) temporal corre-
lations via replay buﬀer and 2) target instability with target networks.
The 𝑄-value update function of the Q-Learning algorithm is a 
sample-based version of value iteration that iteratively applies the Bell-
man optimization equation. It performs updates based on the diﬀerence 
between estimated 𝑄-values and target 𝑄-values.
3.2.2.  Diﬀerential semi-gradient n-step SARSA
This algorithm is a variant of the SARSA algorithm that combines 
three essential components for RL: 1) Diﬀerential RL, which replaces the 
discount factor 𝛾 with a focus on the average reward per time step ̄𝑟; 2) 
𝑛-step bootstrapping, which considers an 𝑛-step window to balance bias 
and variance; and 3) semi-gradient, which uses gradients for function 
approximation optimization while ignoring the target’s dependency on 
current parameters (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
While in DQL we seek the maximum over next-action values (thus 
requiring the agent to learn which action is better than another), in 
Diﬀerential Semi-Gradient 𝑛-Step SARSA, we use the estimated next-
action value itself as the target for 𝑄-value updates. This target will 
change whenever the agent takes an exploratory action. Like SARSA, it 
is an on-policy algorithm because the agent initializes the value of the 
next action to be taken by sampling from its behavior policy. Moreover, 
unlike DQL, its value function estimate is updated after every transition 
in the environment.
3.3.  Action selection techniques
One of the most signiﬁcant dilemmas in RL is the trade-oﬀ between 
exploration and exploitation (Morales, 2020; Sutton & Barto, 2018). In 
exploration, the agent’s role is to discover new actions to gather more 
information about the environment. In exploitation, the agent leverages 
known information to maximize reward, meaning it will always tend to 
select the action with the highest value. Properly balancing these two 
behavioral modes is the primary objective of action selection techniques 
(Morales, 2020; Sutton & Barto, 2018). Action selection techniques in 
RL determine which action an agent takes in each state, typically by 
balancing exploration of new actions with exploitation of known high-
reward actions to maximize long-term return.
Choosing an appropriate action selection mechanism signiﬁcantly 
impacts both learning and agent performance, since in RL, agents learn 
from their own acquired experiences (whether from actions deemed 
good or bad) and act based on what has been learned so far. Morales 
(2020) (Morales, 2020) discusses some of these action selection tech-
niques; below we describe those most relevant to this research:
• 𝜖-greedy: A technique that combines exploration and exploitation, 
where 𝜖 is the probability that the agent selects a random action. It 
consists of acting most of the time greedily and exploring randomly 
occasionally,
𝑎𝑡=
{
arg max 𝑄𝑡(𝑠, 𝑎),
with probability 1 −𝜖𝑡
any action,
with probability 𝜖𝑡
.
(1)
• Decaying 𝜖-greedy: An adaptation of 𝜖-greedy where 𝜖𝑡 decreases 
over time. It starts with a high exploration rate and gradually reduces 
it, favoring exploitation as learning progresses. The exploration rate 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
3 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
𝜖𝑡 at time step 𝑡 is deﬁned as:
𝜖𝑡= max(𝜖min, 𝜖0 ⋅𝜆𝑡),
𝑎𝑡=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
arg max
𝑎∈
𝑄𝑡(𝑠, 𝑎),
with probability 1 −𝜖𝑡
uniform random action,
with probability 𝜖𝑡
,
(2)
where 𝜖0 is the initial exploration rate (𝜖0 ∈[0, 1]), 𝜆 is the decay rate 
(𝜆∈(0, 1)), 𝜖min is the minimum exploration threshold, and 𝑎𝑡 is the 
selected action.
• Softmax: Samples actions from a probability distribution over 
action-value estimates, where selection probability is proportional 
to each action’s current estimated value. The probability 𝜋𝑡(𝑎|𝑠) of 
selecting action 𝑎 in state 𝑠 is determined by the Boltzmann distribu-
tion:
𝜋𝑡(𝑎|𝑠) =
𝑒𝑄𝑡(𝑠,𝑎)∕𝜏
∑
𝑏∈𝑒𝑄𝑡(𝑠,𝑏)∕𝜏,
(3)
where 𝜏∈ℝ+ is the temperature parameter controlling exploration 
intensity. Lower 𝜏 values increase the probability of selecting the 
highest-valued action, tending towards a greedy policy as 𝜏→0.
In this work, the softmax and decaying 𝜖-greedy algorithms were 
chosen not only for experimentation in our proposed RS, but also as 
foundational baselines for two domain-speciﬁc exploration strategies. 
This choice is justiﬁed by the need to balance exploration and exploita-
tion in dynamic environments, as well as the diﬀerences between these 
two algorithms. While the softmax method oﬀers continuous exploration 
proportional to the value of the actions, which is ideal for policy reﬁne-
ment, the decaying 𝜖-greedy adopts an initial strategy of intense ex-
ploration that is gradually abandoned in favor of optimization. This is 
essential in scenarios where the optimal system behavior emerges over 
time. For the decaying 𝜖-greedy exploration strategy, the parameters 
were conﬁgured with a maximum 𝜖 of 1, which decayed to a minimum 𝜖
of 0. The 𝜖 decay rate was set to 0.9 and was applied with a decay fre-
quency of every 10 timesteps. For the softmax exploration strategy, the 
temperature (𝜏) was set to 100.
4.  State recommender system for actuator devices in smart homes
This work proposes an event-driven RS for SHs that recommends ac-
tuator device states using multiple DRL agents. Through simulated ex-
periments, we assess whether implicit user feedback can optimize each 
device-speciﬁc controller policy. Since implicit feedback infers intent 
from observed behavior, the reward and feedback modeling must be 
carefully deﬁned to avoid erroneous inferences that degrade system per-
formance. In our framework, the RS is the delivered application, DRL 
provides the learning and interaction mechanism, and the SH domain 
supplies the simulation and validation environment.
The RS logic is triggered by events such as user actions, device mes-
sages, or changes in system state. These events trigger the execution of 
speciﬁc functions and methods to process and respond to them in real-
time. The proposed architecture (Fig. 1) incorporates the environment 
and features multiple collaborative agents that orchestrate smart actua-
tor devices through state recommendations.
The workﬂow, as illustrated in Fig. 1, is initiated when new events 
generated by the inhabitants’ direct actions on the environment are de-
tected. This ensures that agents always receive the home’s current state 
in an up-to-date manner. Including not only the state of each device 
but also a temporal representation of when the changes were made. 
The following steps outline the sequential ﬂow of the proposed recom-
mender system (Fig. 1) and highlight how events are processed and how 
agents interact to generate and reﬁne device recommendations within 
the smart home environment.
1. The user’s interaction with a smart device modiﬁes the environ-
ment’s state, thus creating a new event;
2. The RS receives the house model at the current moment (timestamps 
and device states);
3. The Data Processing Agent processes, treats, and retransmits the data, 
transforming the received house model into environment state 𝑆;
4. Each of the Recommender agents generates state recommendations for 
the actuator device to which they refer, based on their trained DRL 
models;
5. In the next event, the user’s implicit feedback is inferred from their 
behavior and used to calculate rewards that will be sent to the Rec-
ommender agents and later used in training the DRL models.
The environment is an abstraction of the RL framework that repre-
sents the world in which the RS interacts. Our SH environment com-
prises two types of devices:
• Sensor devices: They are responsible for collecting internal or exter-
nal data, detecting information about the Environment and the inhab-
itants of the home, and monitoring variables such as motion, temper-
ature, humidity, and air quality. They are used exclusively to observe 
the Environment and identify the behavior of the inhabitants.
• Actuator devices: They receive action signals from the Controller 
Agent or directly from the inhabitants, transforming the signals into 
physical changes in the Environment and continuously indicating 
their state. Examples include lights, electronic locks, smart plugs, 
and air conditioners.
The state recommender system employs multiple autonomous DRL 
agents that interact collaboratively to achieve both common and indi-
vidual goals. The need to assign an agent to each actuator device arises 
from the inherent complexity of these devices and, by extension, the 
environment in which they operate. Agents operate through a cycle of 
perception, action, reward reception, and learning, enabling the opti-
mization of adaptive strategies.
• Data processing agent: It is responsible for processing the data 
received from the Environment and sending it to the Recommender 
agents, ensuring quality for learning. Its tasks include encoding non-
numeric values, creating relevant features, and extracting temporal 
attributes. Crucially, to handle the high dimensionality of composite 
states (combinations of diﬀerent device attributes), we employ a Dy-
namic Integer Encoding strategy. As illustrated in Fig. 2, each unique 
message tuple (representing a speciﬁc device conﬁguration) repre-
sents a key in a dynamic dictionary. When a new, unique conﬁgu-
ration is observed, it is assigned a new, incremental scalar integer 
starting from 0. If the conﬁguration has appeared in the history, it 
is mapped to its existing integer code. This ensures that the neural 
networks’ input dimensionality remains compact (scalar) regardless 
of the device’s complexity.
• Recommender agents: It is responsible for recommending states for 
actuator devices under their control, acting directly on the Environ-
ment. Each agent is associated with a single actuator device and em-
ploys a DRL approach, observing states, applying actions, receiving 
rewards, and processing transitions. Internally, agents follow steps 
such as action selection, state transition, transition storage, and the 
generation of speciﬁc recommendations for their actuator devices. 
The learning process is performed every 𝑛 timesteps using a set of 
accumulated transitions.
Table 1 presents the mathematical notation adopted in the proposed 
solution. It summarizes the key symbols used to represent the environ-
ment state, user preferences, agent actions, and reward structure within 
the smart home context. For each actuator, the table distinguishes be-
tween primary and secondary states for both user-deﬁned conﬁgurations 
and agent-generated recommendations. Additionally, it includes the re-
ward components associated with these states, which guide the learning 
process of the DRL agents.
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
4 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 1. Proposed recommender system architecture for smart homes.
Fig. 2. Dynamic integer encoding of device states into scalar values.
Table 1 
Notation of the proposed solution.
 Symbol  Description
𝑆
 Full state of the environment
𝑆𝑆
 Set of states of all sensor devices
𝑆𝐴
 Set of states of all actuator devices
𝑆𝑇
 Set of states of all temporal variables
𝑆𝑆
𝑖
 Complete state of sensor 𝑖
𝑆𝐴
𝑖
 Complete state of actuator 𝑖
𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑝
 Primary state of actuator 𝑖
𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑠𝑗
 Secondary state 𝑗 of actuator 𝑖
𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑝
 Primary state of sensor 𝑖
𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑠𝑗
 Secondary state 𝑗 of sensor 𝑖
𝐴𝑖
 Full state recommended by the agent for actuator 𝑖
𝐴𝑖,𝑝
 Primary state recommended by the agent for actuator 𝑖
𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗
 Secondary state 𝑗 recommended by the agent for actuator 𝑖
𝑈𝑖
 Full state chosen by the user for actuator 𝑖
𝑈𝑖,𝑝
 Primary state chosen by the user for actuator 𝑖
𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗
 Secondary state 𝑗 chosen by the user for actuator 𝑖
𝑅𝑖
 Total reward for the recommendation made by the agent for actuator 𝑖
𝑅𝑖,𝑝
 Reward for the primary state of actuator 𝑖, where 𝑅𝑖,𝑝∈{0, 1}
𝑅𝑖,𝑠
 Reward for the set of secondary states of actuator 𝑖
𝑅𝑖,𝑠𝑗
 Reward for secondary state 𝑗 of actuator 𝑖, where 𝑅𝑖,𝑠𝑗∈[0, 1]
𝑛𝑖
 Total number of states (primary + secondary) for actuator 𝑖
1(⋅)
 Indicator function that equals 1 if the condition is true, and 0 otherwise
𝑊𝐷
 Set of values representing the weekday
𝐻𝐼
 Set of values representing the hour-level intervals
𝑀𝐼
 Set of values representing the minute-level interval
4.1.  User interaction with the environment and implicit feedback
In a SH, the users represent the house’s inhabitants. To improve 
user satisfaction, RS requires mechanisms to transform user interactions 
into learning opportunities. Our approach automatically models implicit 
feedback by leveraging home data, removing the dependency on direct 
user input (explicit feedback). Fig. 3 demonstrates this modeling for a 
single actuator device. The same formulation is applied uniformly to all 
actuator devices in the Environment.
At each event, the RS generates recommendations for the actuator 
devices’ states and stores them in the environment. When the next event 
occurs, and a user interacts with any device that alters its state, rewards 
are calculated for each actuator device using the most recent recom-
mended state (𝐴𝑖) and the current user-selected state (𝑈𝑖) for that de-
vice in this event. If the device state remains as recommended by its 
corresponding controller agent, we can say that the implicit feedback is 
positive; otherwise, it is negative. For example, if a user turns oﬀ the 
bedroom light, this indicates disagreement with the agent’s earlier rec-
ommendation to keep it on, resulting in negative implicit feedback.
4.2.  Deﬁning the Markov decision process (MDP)
To formally model our DRL-based RS problem, we use a MDP. This 
section details the key components of our MDP model, including the 
deﬁnition of states, the set of possible actions, and the reward function 
used to deﬁne the relationship between the agents in our RS and the 
Environment.
4.2.1.  States
To ensure a robust state representation and handle the complexity of 
heterogeneous smart devices, we explicitly deﬁne a hierarchical struc-
ture for device attributes. Before detailing the speciﬁc state subsets, we 
categorize these attributes into two fundamental types:
• Primary State (𝑆𝑖,𝑝): Represents the device’s fundamental opera-
tional status, typically a binary value (e.g., ‘ON’/‘OFF’) or a discrete 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
5 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 3. Modeling implicit feedback by converting user interactions into rewards for recommender agents.
activation mode. It acts as a gatekeeper; secondary states are func-
tionally relevant only when the primary state is active.
• Secondary States (𝑆𝑖,𝑠): Represent the speciﬁc conﬁguration param-
eters, such as temperature setpoints, light intensity, or color values, 
which depend on the device being in an active primary state.
Based on this hierarchical deﬁnition, the system constructs the com-
plete state vector. Each record processed by the agent is represented by 
the union of three state subsets 𝑆= 𝑆𝑇∪𝑆𝑆∪𝑆𝐴, where:
• 𝑆𝑇 represents the temporal states;
• 𝑆𝑆 represents the sensor device states;
• 𝑆𝐴 represents the actuator device states.
The speciﬁc components of these subsets are detailed below:
• Temporal states: a subset of the Environment state referring to the 
states extracted from the timestamp, representing the temporal con-
text for learning. Our proposal includes three temporal variables:
– Day of the week: Numbers from 0 to 6 referring to weekdays, 
where 0 represents Monday, and 6 represents Sunday.
– Hour-level interval: Values from 0 to 3, as the day is divided into 
four 6-hour intervals, where 0 represents the interval between 
00:00 and 06:00.
– Minute-level interval: Values from 0 to 143, since the day is 
divided into 144 intervals of 10 min each, where 0 represents 
the interval between 00:00 and 00:10.
The set of temporal states is represented by:
𝑊𝐷= {𝑠𝑖𝑛(weekday), 𝑐𝑜𝑠(weekday)},
𝐻𝐼= {𝑠𝑖𝑛(hour-interval), 𝑐𝑜𝑠(hour-interval)},
𝑀𝐼= {𝑠𝑖𝑛(minute-interval), 𝑐𝑜𝑠(minute-interval)},
𝑆𝑇= 𝑊𝐷∪𝐻𝐼∪𝑀𝐼.
(4)
The use of sine and cosine provides a representation that reﬂects 
the cyclical nature of temporal variables. It allows models to capture 
sequential and temporal patterns (Kazemi et al., 2019; Vaswani et al., 
2017). For example, the distance between 11 PM and midnight is 
only one hour, but if represented in their original form, this distance 
would be 23 (23 −0).
• Sensor device states: It is also a subset of the Environment state, 
represented by:
𝑆𝑆= {𝑆𝑆
1 , 𝑆𝑆
2 , … , 𝑆𝑆
𝑝} ⊆𝑆.
(5)
The state of each sensor device 𝑆𝑆
𝑖 is also a subset, containing the 
primary state and, if present, secondary states:
𝑆𝑆
𝑖= {𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑝} ∪{𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑠1, 𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑠2, … , 𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑠𝑘},
(6)
where 𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑝 is the primary state of sensor 𝑖, and 𝑆𝑆
𝑖,𝑠𝑗 are its secondary 
states, with 𝑗= 1, 2, … , 𝑘 and 𝑘≥0.
• Actuator device states: It is another subset of the Environment state, 
represented by:
𝑆𝐴= {𝑆𝐴
1 , 𝑆𝐴
2 , … , 𝑆𝐴
𝑚} ⊆𝑆.
(7)
As with the sensor devices, each actuator state 𝑆𝐴
𝑖 is a subset com-
posed of a primary state and, optionally, secondary states:
𝑆𝐴
𝑖= {𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑝} ∪{𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑠1, 𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑠2, … , 𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑠𝑘}
(8)
where 𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑝 is the primary state of actuator 𝑖, and 𝑆𝐴
𝑖,𝑠𝑗 are the sec-
ondary states of actuator 𝑖, with 𝑗= 1, 2, … , 𝑘 and 𝑘≥0.
• Environment state: The complete state, which includes temporal 
states (𝑆𝑇), sensor device states (𝑆𝑆), and actuator device states 
(𝑆𝐴). It is the result of the processing of the house model. This pro-
cessing results in an Environment state represented by:
𝑆= 𝑆𝑇∪𝑆𝑆∪𝑆𝐴.
(9)
Finally, regarding the dimensionality of the resulting state space, we 
rely on the Dynamic Integer Encoding performed by the Data Processing 
Agent (Fig. 2). By mapping each unique tuple of primary and secondary 
attributes to a single scalar identiﬁer, the dimensionality of the state 
representation for any device 𝑖 in the neural network input is always 1. 
We use this approach to mitigate the high dimensionality inherent to 
complex IoT devices.
4.2.2.  Actions
The action space of each controller agent is dynamic and increases 
with each novel state observed for the corresponding device. For exam-
ple, turning on a lamp can be recommended only if there is prior evi-
dence that it was on. Thus, agents need not consider all possible device 
actions, but only those previously selected by residents.
Based on state encoding, where a single numeric code represents a 
set of device states. The actions taken by agents are represented using 
the same numeric codes, which are later decoded to enable state transi-
tions and reward computation in the subsequent event. Fig. 4 shows that 
the action space grows as the device transitions to a previously unseen 
state. Smaller action spaces tend to help agents learn faster and make 
more accurate decisions by reducing the number of options they need 
to explore and evaluate.
4.2.3.  Reward function
With our implicit feedback already modeled, the reward function is 
computed as the diﬀerence between the recommended states and the 
user’s modiﬁcations. Our reward function was designed to prioritize 
the actuator’s primary states, incorporate the secondary-state diﬀerence, 
and normalize the reward. The recommendations generated by the Rec-
ommender Agents will be evaluated through the value returned by the 
reward function,
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
6 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 4. Dynamic action space.
𝑅𝑖,𝑝= 1(𝐴𝑖,𝑝= 𝑈𝑖,𝑝),
𝑅𝑖,𝑠𝑗(𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗, 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗) =
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
1(𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗= 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗),
if 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗is categorical,
1 −
√||||
𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗−𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗
max(𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗,𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗)
||||
,
if 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗 is numerical
,
𝑅𝑖,𝑠=
𝑝
∑
𝑗=1
𝑅𝑖,𝑠𝑗,
𝑅𝑖= 𝑅𝑖,𝑝⋅
( 𝑅𝑖,𝑝+ 𝑅𝑖,𝑠
𝑛𝑖
+ 1(𝐴𝑖= 𝑈𝑖)
)
,
(10)
where the reward for each new event is determined by the action exe-
cuted in the previous event. This reward function consists of four steps:
1. Primary State Reward (𝑅𝑖,𝑝) uses an indicator function 1(⋅) to eval-
uate whether the recommended primary state 𝐴𝑖,𝑝 by the actuator 
agent 𝑖 matches the state chosen by the user 𝑈𝑖,𝑝 in the next event, 
returning one if they match (i.e., the agent is correct) and zero oth-
erwise.
2. Secondary State Rewards (𝑅𝑖,𝑠𝑗) evaluates the accuracy of the 
secondary state recommendation 𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗 against the user-selected state 
𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗. If 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗 is categorical, the reward is one if the values match 
and zero otherwise. If 𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗 is numeric, the reward is calculated as 
1 −
√||||
𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗−𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗
max(𝐴𝑖,𝑠𝑗,𝑈𝑖,𝑠𝑗)
||||
.
3. Total Secondary State Reward (𝑅𝑖,𝑠) the rewards from all sec-
ondary states are summed to obtain 𝑅𝑖,𝑠, reﬂecting the agent’s overall 
performance regarding secondary states.
4. Full Reward (𝑅𝑖) is the product of the primary reward 𝑅𝑖,𝑝 and the 
average of 𝑅𝑖,𝑝+ 𝑅𝑖,𝑠 divided by the total number of states 𝑛𝑖 of actu-
ator 𝑖. If the agent fails the primary state (𝑅𝑖,𝑝= 0), the total reward 
is 0. If the agent correctly identiﬁes the primary state, the total re-
ward is computed over both the primary and secondary states. Addi-
tionally, a bonus value 1(𝐴𝑖= 𝑈𝑖) is added when the agent correctly 
recommends all states (primary and secondary), eﬀectively doubling 
the reward.
The design of our reward function is strictly derived from the hier-
archical nature of smart devices, rather than arbitrary heuristic tuning. 
The multiplicative structure involving 𝑅𝑖,𝑝 acts as a logic gate: physi-
cally, secondary attributes (e.g., color, intensity) are only realized when 
the device is active (in the primary state). Therefore, if the agent fails 
to predict the primary state (𝑅𝑖,𝑝= 0), the entire reward is zeroed to 
prevent the accumulation of ‘false positive’ rewards. Furthermore, the 
function avoids tunable hyperparameters (such as weighted sums) by 
utilizing averages normalized by the number of states (𝑛𝑖). Finally, the 
explicit addition of the term 1(𝐴𝑖= 𝑈𝑖) introduces a sparse reward com-
ponent solely for perfect matches, encouraging the agent to converge 
towards the exact ground truth rather than settling for suboptimal par-
tial matches.
4.3.  Adaptive action selection strategies
The non-stationarity of environments, particularly in smart homes 
where user routines change signiﬁcantly over time, poses a substan-
tial challenge for autonomous agents. Following such shifts, an agent 
utilizing a pre-established action policy often experiences performance 
degradation and an increased error rate (Ditzler et al., 2015; Padakandla 
et al., 2020). This issue is compounded by the fact that these settings 
constitute continuous-horizon environments; consequently, the action-
selection function must dynamically adjust its exploration rate. This ad-
justment, based on the agents’ current performance, mitigates the sys-
tem’s tendency toward a purely greedy strategy and ensures the long-
term eﬀectiveness of the adopted policy (Carvalho et al., 2025). In re-
sponse to this problem, we propose two domain-speciﬁc action-selection 
heuristics that adapt to these dynamics, guided by the average daily re-
ward.
In the proposed RS, the average reward ̄𝑟𝑑 is computed and stored by 
each agent at the end of each day. Based on this metric, we adapted both 
action selection algorithms so that the 𝜖 value in the decaying 𝜖-greedy
and the 𝜏 value in the softmax are adjusted according to the average 
reward received throughout the experiment. These adaptations are de-
signed to increase exploration during low-reward periods and prioritize 
exploitation during high-reward phases. Essentially, this forces the agent 
to re-evaluate its choices immediately after a routine change, as the re-
ward tends to drop abruptly in such situations. Based on this approach, 
we introduced two tailored adaptations of standard action selection al-
gorithms:
• Reward-based 𝜖-greedy: In this method, we deﬁne maximum and 
minimum values for 𝜖 (𝜖𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝜖𝑚𝑖𝑛), representing the range in which 𝜖
can ﬂuctuate. At the end of each experiment day, the average daily 
reward (̄𝑟𝑑) is calculated. Then, its value is compared to 0.5, and a 
new 𝜖 value is set. The higher the ̄𝑟𝑑, the lower the new 𝜖. In our 
setup, 𝜖𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝜖𝑚𝑎𝑥 are 0 and 1, respectively. The value of ̄𝑟𝑑 always 
lies between 0 and 2 in both the simple-state and the composite-state 
approach. Therefore, we limit ̄𝑟𝑑 to 1 and compare it to 0.5, which 
is the average possible reward in both state approachs, when we do 
not consider the total hit bonus 1(𝐴𝑖= 𝑈𝑖) responsible for making the 
rewards jump from 1 to 2, as can be seen in Eq. (10). This ensures 
that the better the agent performs, the more it tends to choose the 
action it considers best. The next 𝜖 value is then computed as follows:
𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡=
{
𝜖𝑚𝑎𝑥,
if ̄𝑟𝑑≤0.5
𝜖𝑚𝑎𝑥
2 ,
if ̄𝑟𝑑> 0.5
,
𝑛𝑒𝑤_𝜖= max(𝜖𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡⋅(1 −min(̄𝑟𝑑, 1))).
(11)
• Reward-based softmax: In this method, we also deﬁne maximum 
and minimum values, but this time for 𝜏 (𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛), which represent 
the range in which 𝜏 can ﬂuctuate. Since the maximum possible value 
for ̄𝑟𝑑 is 2, we limit it to 1 so that the average daily reward inﬂuences 
𝜏 only between 𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛. This value directly impacts the new 𝜏
in a proportional manner: the greater the ̄𝑟𝑑, the greater the new 𝜏, 
which is calculated as:
𝜏= max(𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥⋅min(̄𝑟𝑑, 1)).
(12)
5.  Experiment setup
5.1.  Real-world dataset
During the experiments, we used a dataset of real records captured 
in a residential IoT environment with single-resident occupancy. The ex-
perimental scenario was conﬁned to a bedroom, designated as the pri-
mary location of occupancy due to its dual use for rest, work, and leisure. 
Data collection spanned 17 days, from August 3, 2024, at 23:40:37 to 
August 19, 2024, at 08:44:46, resulting in a total of 6,560 recorded 
events. To capture the environment’s dynamics, the space was instru-
mented with three actuators (a smart bulb, a smart plug connected to a 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
7 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Table 2 
Diﬀerent types of messages that can be generated by HESTIA.
 State approach
Description
Example
 Simple
It considers only a single state for each device, focusing on their primary 
states. For example, a lamp can only be turned on or oﬀ.
 {’status’: [
  {code: switch, value: ON}
 ]}
 Composite
It considers more than one state for each device. For example, in addition to 
the lamp being able to be turned on and oﬀ, its light intensity, lamp color, 
and other secondary states can also be modiﬁed.
 {’status’: [
  {code: switch, value: ON},
  {code: temp_set, value: 24},
  {code: mode, value: WIND}
 ]}
computer, and a fan) and sensors to monitor presence, window opening, 
temperature, and humidity.
The monitored routine, which comprises the behavioral context, 
presents distinct temporal patterns. On weekdays, the resident is typ-
ically absent between 09:00 and 19:00, maintaining a nightly rest be-
tween 23:00 and 00:00. Conversely, on weekends, room occupancy in-
tensiﬁes with prolonged computer usage, interspersed with brief ab-
sences for household activities in other rooms. This variability provides 
a realistic scenario for validating the proposed algorithms.
Prior to use in the experiments, the raw data were processed and 
normalized. This stage included excluding irrelevant technical reports, 
such as battery levels, and reconstructing the device state. Reconstruc-
tion was necessary to convert the original protocol, which recorded only 
partial changes (deltas), into complete state vectors, ensuring the con-
textual integrity of each processed event.
5.2.  Synthetic datasets
We employed Home Environment Simulator Targeting Inhabitant 
Activities (HESTIA) (dos Santos et al., 2025), a simulator for resident-
oriented smart environments, to generate two synthetic datasets. This 
enabled us to extend the evaluation period and simulate controlled 
routine shifts, assessing the approach’s adaptability beyond the tempo-
ral constraints of real-world capture. This simulator can generate data 
for smart environments focused on user interaction. Data generation is 
based on a graph that speciﬁes the distribution of rooms and indicates 
which are active based on user interaction. For each user, it is possible 
to deﬁne an activity routine for each day of the week and their preferred 
device state for each activity.
The simulator data provides device interaction data using two ap-
proaches: simple-state, which includes only the device’s primary state 
(e.g., switch), and composite-state, which includes the primary state 
plus additional secondary states (e.g., temp_set and mode). Examples 
of both message formats are detailed in Table 2.
Fig. 5 shows the simulated environment used for data generation, 
consisting of a house with nine rooms: a living room, a hallway, a 
kitchen, an oﬃce, two bedrooms, two bathrooms, and a balcony. Across 
this environment, 26 smart devices, including nine sensors and 17 ac-
tuators, are distributed throughout the rooms. Based on this setup, we 
created three routines in Hestia to generate data under diﬀerent occu-
pancy conﬁgurations and resident activities.
• Routine A: Coexistence routine of two people with diﬀerent work 
and study routines. Both share the same space, but their daily activ-
ities occur at speciﬁc times and places. One resident works full-time 
in person, while the other works remotely and studies at night, cre-
ating a complementary ﬂow of activities throughout the day. User 1 
works in person, and his routine is dictated by work. From Monday 
to Friday, he wakes up early, leaving for work at 7:30 AM and re-
turning late in the afternoon, around 5:00 PM, with the rest of the 
evening dedicated to rest. His sleep period begins earlier, approxi-
mately 9:15 PM. User 2, due to remote work and nighttime study, 
has a more ﬂexible routine. From Monday to Friday, he starts work 
Fig. 5. Graph of the house model used for routine generation. Vertices represent 
the rooms, and edges represent the connections between them.
in his home oﬃce at 8:15 AM, with a lunch break. The workday ends 
at 5:10 PM. In the evening, the study routine begins with leaving for 
college at 6:30 PM, returning around 11:00 PM, and then going to 
bed at 11:20 PM.
• Routine B: This routine describes a living environment for three peo-
ple with distinct work and study routines. While two residents work 
full-time in person, the third divides their day between an internship 
and evening studies, generating a ﬂow of complementary activities 
throughout the day. User 1 and User 2 both work in person but have 
slightly diﬀerent morning routines. User 1 leaves for work early, at 
7:30 AM, and returns at 5:00 PM. User 2 includes a trip to the gym 
before leaving for work at 8:20 AM and returning at 5:50 PM. Both 
end their workdays early, going to bed around 9:15 PM and 9:10 PM, 
respectively. User 3’s routine is split between his morning internship 
and evening college. He leaves for his internship at 7:20 AM and 
returns at noon. The afternoon is dedicated to rest and leisure activi-
ties. He leaves for college again at 6:20 PM and only returns home at 
10:50 PM, with his sleep period beginning later, around 11:10 PM. 
His routine contrasts with that of the other residents, who end their 
workdays earlier.
• Routine C: This routine describes the environment shared by two 
residents who work in person during the day, with well-deﬁned 
schedules and activities. Their routines are similar in structure, with 
slight variations in departure and return times, demonstrating a dis-
tinct ﬂow of activities throughout the day. User 1 follows a more 
regular pattern: he wakes up early, leaves for work at 7:30 AM, re-
turns at 5:00 PM, and goes to bed around 9:15 PM. User 2 incorpo-
rates an extra activity into his morning routine. He wakes up at the 
same time but goes to the gym before leaving for work at 8:20 AM. 
Consequently, he returns home at 5:50 PM and goes to bed at 9:10 
PM, slightly earlier than User 1.
It is essential to note that these routines apply to weekdays (Monday 
through Friday). The speciﬁed time ranges are approximate and may 
vary slightly due to changes in the start and end times of activities. Fur-
thermore, weekend activities vary widely across users, typically includ-
ing leisure pursuits such as walking, exercising, playing video games, 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
8 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
watching TV, and playing soccer. By simulating these routines, HESTIA 
generated two distinct datasets, each spanning 90 days and document-
ing the transition between three diﬀerent routines. Both datasets share 
the common characteristic of simulating usage data in a smart environ-
ment with routine changes over time.
• Dataset AC: Records 20,847 events with 8 sensors and 13 actua-
tors, spanning 90 days, divided into two routines: A (days 1 to 60) 
and C (days 61 to 90). Initially, one of the two residents worked re-
motely but began working in person after 60 days, which disrupted 
the routine and enabled analysis of the impact on the recommenda-
tion system’s performance.
• Dataset BC: With 26,238 events, 9 sensors, and 17 actuators, it re-
ﬂects the occupancy of three residents during the ﬁrst 60 days of 
Routine B. After this period, the departure of one resident reduced 
the number of residents to two, leading to the transition to Routine 
C and allowing the assessment of the impact of the change in the 
number of users.
With these two datasets generated from the simulation, it is possible 
to analyze changes in speakers’ routines within the same environment, 
thereby enabling evaluation of the proposed recommendation system’s 
performance.
5.3.  Validation metrics
To validate our proposal, we must demonstrate both the average of 
the presented validation metric and its daily values, thereby showing 
the evolution of learning over time.
5.3.1.  Average daily reward
In RL research, the average reward is used as the primary validation 
metric most of the time. As rewards are fundamental to both agents’ 
learning and their operation, analyzing them is essential to understand-
ing the outcomes.
The calculation of the average reward is performed daily,
̄𝑟𝑑= 1
𝑇
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
𝑟𝑡,
(13)
where the daily average for the experiment day 𝑑 is equal to the sum of 
the rewards from all time steps 𝑡 that occurred on day 𝑑 divided by the 
total number of time steps 𝑇 during that day. This analysis enables the 
assessment of agent performance across experimental days and the com-
parison of performance variations across diﬀerent days of the week. It 
also characterizes the agents’ behavior in response to shifts in residents’ 
routines, which induce corresponding changes in device-state patterns.
5.3.2.  Daily hierarchical hamming score
In this study, we introduce Hierarchical Hamming Score (HHS) to 
evaluate performance in tasks with hierarchically dependent classes, a 
characteristic often ignored by standard multi-label metrics. Unlike the 
traditional Hamming Score, which treats all labels independently, our 
context involves physical constraints in which secondary states (e.g., 
color, intensity) are relevant only when the primary state (e.g., power 
switch) is correctly engaged. A standard metric might award partial 
credit for correct secondary parameters even if the device is wrongly 
turned oﬀ, overestimating the agent’s utility. To address this, HHS im-
poses a strict penalty: if the primary state prediction is incorrect, the 
score for that instance is set to zero, regardless of secondary matches, 
ensuring the metric aligns with the user’s operational intent.
𝐻𝐻𝑆𝑑= 1
𝑇
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
0,
if 𝑌𝑡,0 ≠
̂
𝑌𝑡,0
1
𝑛
𝑛∑
𝑖=0
𝛿(𝑌𝑡,𝑖, ̂𝑌𝑡,𝑖),
otherwise ,
(14)
where 𝑑 is the experiment day, 𝑛 is the total number of states (including 
primary), 𝑇 is the total time steps, 𝑌𝑡,0 and ̂
𝑌𝑡,0 are the expected and rec-
ommended primary states, and 𝑌𝑡,𝑖 and ̂𝑌𝑡,𝑖 correspond to the secondary 
states. This calculation ensures that a “total success” requires the correct 
prediction of the entire hierarchy, while a ‘partial error’ is possible only 
if the fundamental action (primary state) is incorrect.
5.4.  Supervised learning baseline: Online behavior cloning
To rigorously assess the speciﬁc contribution of the sequential 
decision-making formulation provided by the DRL agents, we imple-
mented an online Supervised Learning (SL) baseline, speciﬁcally a Be-
havior Cloning agent. Unlike RL, which aims to maximize cumulative fu-
ture rewards through trial-and-error, this baseline treats the smart home 
automation task as a multi-class classiﬁcation problem. Its objective is 
to minimize the immediate prediction error between the recommended 
action and the user’s actual action using Cross-Entropy Loss, eﬀectively 
cloning the user’s behavior pattern without forward-looking planning.
The selection of this speciﬁc baseline is grounded in the need to iso-
late the algorithmic performance from the neural network’s capacity. 
By comparing DRL agents with a Supervised agent that shares the same 
feature extraction capabilities, any performance divergence can be at-
tributed to the learning paradigm (RL vs. Supervised) rather than the 
model architecture.
To ensure a fair comparison, the SL agent utilizes the exact same 
Deep Neural Network (DNN) architecture as the DQL and DSGnSARSA 
agents. The network consists of three fully connected hidden layers with 
64, 128, and 64 units, respectively, using Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU) 
activation functions. The output layer size is dynamically updated to 
match the number of available actions in the smart home environment.
The training is performed incrementally online. Similar to the RL 
agents, the SL agent stores experiences in a replay buﬀer and samples 
a batch of size 100 uniformly to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and 
temporal correlations. The optimization is performed using the Adam
optimizer.
Regarding the hyperparameter conﬁguration, we conducted a grid 
search to identify the optimal settings for the baseline, mirroring the 
rigorous tuning process applied to the DRL agents. We evaluated the 
Learning Rate over the set {10−3, 10−4}. The conﬁguration with learning 
rate equals 10−3 consistently yielded the highest HHS across all exper-
imental scenarios and was therefore selected for the ﬁnal comparison. 
All other structural parameters, such as the batch size of 100 and the 
use of the Adam optimizer, remained ﬁxed to match the DRL agents’ 
conﬁguration.
The fundamental distinction between the proposed DRL agents and 
this baseline lies in their respective optimization objectives. While the 
DRL agents aim to maximize cumulative future rewards using the Mean 
Squared Error (MSE) loss on the Temporal Diﬀerence error, the Behavior 
Cloning agent approaches the task as a multi-class classiﬁcation prob-
lem. It optimizes the network using the Cross-Entropy Loss function to 
minimize the immediate divergence between the predicted action prob-
abilities and the ground-truth user action. This formulation forces the 
agent to strictly imitate the user’s immediate behavior without the ex-
ploratory or forward-looking planning capabilities inherent to the RL 
paradigm.
5.5.  Hyperparameter tuning
During the experiment, the two algorithms presented in Section 3.2 
are used: DQL and DSGnSARSA. Each of them employed two state ap-
proaches and utilized the three datasets listed in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
Employing a grid search strategy to ﬁnd the best hyperparameters, we 
evaluated 48 combinations for DQL and 32 combinations for DSGn-
SARSA. Each combination was executed 3 times, using a diﬀerent ran-
dom seed to ensure robust results, for a total of 1440 experimental trials.
The overall metrics are computed by averaging the validation met-
rics across runs with three random seeds for each combination of algo-
rithm, approach, and hyperparameter set. Running the algorithm once 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
9 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Table 3 
Optimal hyperparameters for the DQL algorithm on each dataset and state approach.
 State approach
 Dataset
 Discount
 Experience type
 Action selector
 Learning rate
 simple
 AC
 0.90
 random
 reward-based softmax
 0.001
 BC
 0.90
 random
 reward-based 𝜖-greedy
 0.001
 real-world
 0.95
 random
 softmax
 0.001
 composite
 AC
 0.90
 random
 reward-based 𝜖-greedy
 0.001
 BC
 0.95
 random
 reward-based 𝜖-greedy
 0.001
 real-world
 0.9
 random
 decaying 𝜖-greedy
 0.001
Table 4 
Optimal hyperparameters for the diﬀerential semi-gradient n-step SARSA 
algorithm on each dataset and state approach.
 State approach
 Dataset
 Action selector
 Learning rate
 n
 simple
 AC
 softmax
 0.0001
 1
 BC
 softmax
 0.0001
 1
 real-world
 reward-based 𝜖-greedy
 0.0001
 1
 composite
 AC
 softmax
 0.0001
 1
 BC
 decaying 𝜖-greedy
 0.0001
 1
 real-world
 decaying 𝜖-greedy
 0.001
 1
may yield metrics aﬀected by random variation that do not accurately 
represent the average performance.
The experiment’s hyperparameters determine how agents learn and 
make decisions. We present the hyperparameters and brief explanations 
of the values tested during the experiments.
• For both algorithms:
– Action selection algorithm: As discussed in Sections 3.3 and 4.3, 
we need to specify how the algorithms select actions for the 
agents. For this experiment, we limited our testing to 4 of these 
action selection algorithms: decaying 𝜖-greedy, softmax, reward-
based 𝜖-greedy, and reward-based softmax.
– Learning rate: This hyperparameter determines the step size for 
updating the neural network weights during training. A higher 
rate yields larger updates, which can lead to oscillation. In con-
trast, a lower rate yields smaller, more precise updates, thereby 
improving stability but extending training time. Values like 0.001
and 0.0001 were tested.
• For DQL only:
– Experience type: Can be random, always providing a random sam-
ple containing 𝑛 elements from the memory buﬀer, or last, pro-
viding the last 𝑛 elements inserted into the memory buﬀer;
– Update frequency: We deﬁne the agent update frequency as 10. 
That is, the DQL agents undergo a new training cycle every 10 
timesteps.
– Discount (𝛾): This hyperparameter quantiﬁes the importance of 
future rewards. A value closer to 1 prioritizes long-term gains, 
weighing future rewards almost as much as present rewards. 
Conversely, a value closer to 0 emphasizes immediate rewards. 
Tested values included 0.85, 0.9, and 0.95.
• For DSGnSARSA only:
– n: In n-step SARSA, this parameter deﬁnes the number of future 
steps used for calculating returns. A smaller n (e.g., 1) favors im-
mediate rewards, while a larger n (e.g., 5) considers longer future 
sequences, potentially speeding learning but increasing variance. 
Values 1, 2, 3, and 5 were tested.
Additionally, we speciﬁed hyperparameters that modify the algo-
rithms executed within the Agents, along with the values to experiment 
with them. The learning rate, discount, and 𝑛 value hyperparameters 
are used in one or both of the tested algorithms and modify how these 
algorithms perform Agent learning.
Tables 3 and 4 show the hyperparameters tested for each of the 
two experimented algorithms. Additionally, the best hyperparameter
combination for each algorithm on each dataset is marked in bold. To 
deﬁne the optimal hyperparameter combinations for each approach, al-
gorithm, and dataset, we used the average daily reward across all ac-
tuator devices in the house over all experimental days. This is because, 
unlike how we calculate the HHS, which only considers agents’ hits and 
errors for each state, the reward also considers the distance between 
numerical states in cases where agents recommend a state with partial 
error.
6.  Results
The discussion is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we report the outcomes 
of both algorithms under the simple-state approach across the three 
datasets, focusing on the HHS metric. Next, we extend the analysis to 
the composite-state approach, which also includes the average reward 
metric. All reported results correspond to the hyperparameter conﬁg-
urations that achieved the highest average rewards, as summarized in 
Tables 3, 4, and in the Section 5.4.
6.1.  Simple-state approach
As discussed earlier, since this approach considers only primary de-
vice states, the action space is smaller and less complex than in the 
alternative setting; consequently, the reward and HHS reduce to scalar 
quantities, making them directly comparable. The reward value will al-
ways be double the HHS (based on Eqs. (14) and (10)). Therefore, for 
the simple-state approach, it is suﬃcient to present a single metric, and 
we opt for the daily HHS.
During the experiments on the AC dataset, we obtained daily HHS 
values, which are presented in Fig. 6. The DQL algorithm yields an 
overall average HHS of approximately 96.69%, whereas the DSGn-
SARSA algorithm achieves a slightly better performance of approxi-
mately 97.59%. Meanwhile, the Supervised baseline (Behavior Cloning) 
achieved a slightly lower HHS of 94.13%. The graphs in Fig. 6 represent 
both validation metrics presented in this chapter.
In the experiments conducted on the BC dataset, the best hyperpa-
rameter combinations achieved average rewards and daily HHS (Fig. 7). 
It can be observed that when using the same simple-state approach with 
the BC dataset, the DSGnSARSA algorithm again performs slightly bet-
ter than DQL, with approximately 97.98% and 96.84% of HHS, respec-
tively. The supervised baseline achieved an HHS of 94.74%.
Figs. 6 and 7 indicate that both algorithms, when tested on synthetic 
dataset scenarios, showed a performance drop on the day the routine 
was changed (day 60 of the experiment). However, they eventually con-
verged to their previous performance levels. Notably, DQL demonstrated 
greater diﬃculty in this recovery process compared to DSGnSARSA. Fur-
thermore, as shown in Fig. 6, during experiments on the AC dataset, the 
DSGnSARSA algorithm achieved a higher HHS than DQL on 84 of 90 
days. In the remaining days, DQL showed superior performance on 4 
occasions, while the Supervised baseline did so on 2 days. The base-
line’s distinct advantage in the initial phase is attributed to the absence 
of the exploration mechanisms inherent to Reinforcement Learning, al-
lowing it to immediately exploit observed patterns without the initial 
performance cost of trial-and-error experimentation. In Fig. 7, a similar 
trend is observed: the Supervised baseline achieved the highest metrics 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
10 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 6. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the AC dataset experiment using the simple-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows the average 
HHS across all devices for each day of the experiment.
Fig. 7. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the BC dataset experiment using the simple-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows the average 
HHS across all devices for each day of the experiment.
during the ﬁrst 2 days, while DQL surpassed the other models on only a 
single day, with DSGnSARSA maintaining superior performance for the 
remainder of the experiment.
On the other hand, the results obtained from the Real-world 
dataset show a reversal of the performance trend observed in previ-
ous experiments, as illustrated in Fig. 8. In this scenario, DQL ob-
tained an overall average HHS of approximately 97.12%, while DSGn-
SARSA reached approximately 95.93%. Both reinforcement learning ap-
proaches achieved higher average HHS values than the Supervised base-
line, which recorded 83.67%. Moreover, the DQL algorithm achieved a 
higher daily average HHS than DSGnSARSA on all 17 days of the exper-
iment. Although the experiment covered a shorter period, these results 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
11 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 8. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the real-world dataset experiment using the simple-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows the 
average HHS across all devices for each day of the experiment.
Fig. 9. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the AC dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows the average 
HHS of all devices for each day of the experiment.
indicate that DQL adapted more eﬀectively to real-world usage patterns 
than DSGnSARSA. This outcome may be partially attributed to the spe-
ciﬁc characteristics of this dataset: representing a short-term capture of 
actual usage, it contains no abrupt routine changes. Consequently, DQL 
was not exposed to the adaptation challenges in which it previously 
showed a worse recovery than DSGnSARSA.
6.2.  Composite-state approach
The composite-state approach, in which most actuators have one or 
more secondary states, introduces greater complexity. This results in a 
wider range of state combinations than the simpler approach, leading 
to expectedly inferior performance. The HHS curves in Fig. 9 indicate 
that, in the AC Dataset under the composite-state approach, DSGnSARSA 
obtained higher HHS values than the other methods in most evaluated 
days. Speciﬁcally, it achieved an overall HHS of approximately 95.96%, 
while the DQL algorithm reached 94.55%, both exhibiting a substan-
tial lead over the Supervised baseline, which achieved an average of 
87.17%.
The same behavior is observed in Fig. 10, when applying our system 
with the composite-state approach to the BC dataset. From the HHS per-
spective, it is important to note that the performance advantage of the 
DSGnSARSA algorithm over DQL increases even further. While the over-
all average HHS for the former is 95.79% and that of the latter is approx-
imately 94.30%, both notably surpassing the Supervised baseline, which 
attained 90.12%. Additionally, the “OVERALL” graph makes it clearer 
that, from the HHS perspective, the performance diﬀerence between the 
two algorithms increases during experiments with the BC dataset.
Regarding the results from the Real-world dataset using this ap-
proach, Fig. 11 shows that both algorithms performed worse overall 
than in the synthetic experiments. In this scenario, DQL achieved an 
average HHS of 92.53%, while DSGnSARSA reached 92.38%. The Su-
pervised baseline obtained a lower average HHS of 74.89%.
In the AC dataset experiments, DSGnSARSA achieved the highest av-
erage daily reward on 78 of the 90 evaluated days, while DQL led on 11 
days and the Supervised baseline on 1 day.
Meanwhile, during the experiments with the BC dataset, we noticed 
that the pattern identiﬁed by HHS in the previous subsection repeats: 
DSGnSARSA surpassed the others on 68 out of 90 days, with DQL leading 
on 16 days and the Supervised baseline on 6 days.
In the real-world dataset, DQL achieved the best HHS value on 12 of 
the 17 evaluated days, while DSGnSARSA achieved the best HHS value 
on the remaining 5 days. The Supervised baseline did not obtain the best 
daily HHS in this dataset. The stable nature of this short-term dataset 
likely masked DQL’s known adaptation weaknesses. Without abrupt rou-
tine changes, DQL was not subjected to the recovery scenarios where 
DSGnSARSA typically proves superior.
Using the overall average rewards, we can better compare the two 
RL algorithms tested. In Fig. 12, we observe the average daily reward 
results when applying the proposed recommendation system to the AC 
dataset with the composite-state approach. The DQL algorithm con-
tinues to perform slightly worse than DSGnSARSA. While the former 
achieved an overall average reward of approximately 1.8866, the latter 
achieved 1.9177. This seems to have occurred because the agents had 
more diﬃculty converging at the beginning of the experiment than after 
the routine change, suggesting a cold-start problem. Another important 
observation is that, after the routine change on day 60, performance 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
12 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 10. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the BC dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows the average 
HHS of all devices for each day of the experiment.
Fig. 11. Daily HHS for each of the actuator devices in the real-world dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows 
the average HHS of all devices for each day of the experiment.
increases slightly for both algorithms, in contrast to the simple-state ap-
proach on the same dataset.
In the experiments on the BC dataset shown in Fig. 13, the superi-
ority of DSGnSARSA over DQL becomes even clearer. Comparing the 
overall average rewards, we have approximately 1.9136 and 1.8776, 
respectively. A sharp drop in DQL’s performance on the “OFFICE AIR 
CONDITIONER” device after day 60 of the experiment is also observ-
able. However, when we examine the “OVERALL” graph and the overall 
average across all devices, the phenomenon observed in the AC dataset 
also appears here, with both algorithms showing slight performance im-
provements after day 60 of the experiment.
Finally, the results for the average daily reward on the Real-world 
dataset are presented in Fig. 14. Consistent with the observations for 
the average daily reward, both algorithms performed worse than in the 
synthetic experiments, as we also observed with the HHS. In terms of 
average reward, DQL achieved a value of 1.8427, while DSGnSARSA 
obtained 1.8397.
In summary, the analysis of average daily rewards reveals a distinct 
performance dichotomy that depends on the environment’s nature. In 
synthetic scenarios (AC and BC), where routine changes and long-term 
dependencies are prevalent, DSGnSARSA demonstrates superior stabil-
ity and higher cumulative returns, eﬀectively mitigating the cold-start 
problem better than DQL. Conversely, in the Real-world dataset, the 
data’s stability and short duration appear to favor the DQL approach, 
albeit by a narrow margin. This suggests that while DSGnSARSA is the 
more robust candidate for long-term, dynamic deployments, DQL re-
mains competitive in shorter, more stable operational windows. 
6.3.  Statistical analysis
To enable a fair and standardized comparison between the diﬀer-
ent models evaluated, Reinforcement Learning algorithms (DQL, DSGn-
SARSA) and the supervised approach (baseline), the HHS metric was 
adopted as the primary performance indicator. The choice of HHS is 
justiﬁed by its being a cross-sectional metric that quantiﬁes the qual-
ity of the decision policy independently of the learning paradigm, pro-
viding a common basis for statistical inference. The evaluation was 
conducted on a total universe of 𝑁= 394 independent samples. This 
sample size results from aggregating three distinct datasets (two sim-
ulated with 90 days each and one real with 17 days), evaluated un-
der two reward modeling approaches (Simple and Composite), yielding 
𝑁= (90 + 90 + 17) × 2 = 394.
From a global perspective, the statistical analysis revealed signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences between the models. The non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis
test rejected the hypothesis of equivalence between the HHS metric dis-
tributions with high conﬁdence (𝐻= 516.05; 𝑝< 10−112). To establish 
the performance hierarchy, the Friedman test conﬁrmed the disparity 
in rankings (𝜒2 = 586.85; 𝑝< 10−128), indicating the DSGnSARSA algo-
rithm as the best ranked globally, as shown in Table 5, with an aver-
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
13 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 12. Average daily reward for each of the actuator devices in the AC dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows 
the average reward of all devices for each day of the experiment.
Fig. 13. Average daily reward for each of the actuator devices in the BC dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” shows 
the average reward across all devices for each day of the experiment.
age rank of 1.19, followed by DQL (1.91) and, lastly, the baseline (2.91). 
Dunn’s post-hoc analysis with Bonferroni correction corroborated that 
all diﬀerences between pairs are statistically signiﬁcant (Table 6). The 
direct comparison between the RL agents (DSGnSARSA vs. DQL) showed 
a p-value of 7.23 × 10−8, while the superiority of both compared to the 
SL baseline was conﬁrmed with extreme p-values (𝑝< 10−58), validating 
the eﬀectiveness of Reinforcement Learning for minimizing HHS.
However, a stratiﬁed analysis by scenario exposes critical nuances 
that the overall average, weighted by the larger volume of simulated 
data (𝑁= 360), tends to mask. As detailed in Table 7, in the simu-
lation environments (sets AC and BC datasets), the DSGnSARSA algo-
rithm demonstrated excellent results, achieving average ranks of 1.03 to 
1.27 across both simple and composite approaches. These results show 
that, in controlled environments where the system dynamics conform to 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
14 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Fig. 14. Average daily reward for each of the actuator devices in the real-world dataset experiment using the composite-state approach. The graph titled “OVERALL” 
shows the average reward of all devices for each day of the experiment.
Table 5 
Global average ranking (Friedman test).
 Algorithm
 Global Average Ranking
 Position
DSGnSARSA
 1.19
 1st
DQL
 1.91
 2nd
SL baseline
 2.91
 3rd
Table 6 
P-value matrix of Dunn’s Post-hoc test with Bonferroni cor-
rection.
 DQL
 DSGNSARSA
 SL baseline
DQL
 –
7.23 × 10−8
4.05 × 10−59
DSGnSARSA
7.23 × 10−8
 –
1.86 × 10−105
SL baseline
4.05 × 10−59
1.86 × 10−105
 –
Table 7 
Detailed average rankings by dataset and approach. The values in bold
and underlined indicate, respectively, the best and second-best perfor-
mance (Lowest average ranks) in each scenario.
 Dataset
 Approach
 DQL
 DSGNSARSA  SL baseline
 Local Winner
 AC
 Composite
1.93
 1.13
 2.93
DSGnSARSA
 Simple
2.02
 1.07
 2.91
DSGnSARSA
 BC
 Composite
1.91
 1.27
 2.82
DSGnSARSA
 Simple
2.04
 1.03
 2.92
DSGnSARSA
 Real-world  Composite
 1.29
1.71
 3.00
DQL
 Simple
 1.00
2.00
 3.00
DQL
the training assumptions, DSGnSARSA achieved the best performance 
across the simulated scenarios, as measured by the HHS metric.
Conversely, a signiﬁcant performance reversal is observed in the 
real-world environment (Real Data), highlighting the Sim-to-Real gap 
phenomenon. In this scenario, DQL took the lead, achieving a rank of 
1.00 in the simple variant and 1.29 in the composite variant, while the 
performance of DSGnSARSA degraded, with values between 1.71 and 
2.00. This reversal suggests that DQL is more robust to stochastic noise 
and unmodeled dynamics inherent to the physical world, generalizing 
better under conditions of practical uncertainty, whereas DSGnSARSA 
is more sensitive to discrepancies between the simulated model and re-
ality. In all cases, the baseline approach consistently ranked last, reaf-
ﬁrming the superiority of the proposed RL strategies. 
6.4.  Computational eﬃciency analysis
To evaluate the computational eﬃciency of the proposed algorithms, 
we monitored their execution times in a controlled environment. All 
experiments were conducted on a workstation equipped with an AMD 
Ryzen 7 5700X3D processor, 32 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce 
RTX 4060 (8 GB) GPU. The algorithms were implemented using Python 
and the PyTorch framework. It is important to note that all computations 
were explicitly executed on the CPU to assess performance baselines 
without hardware acceleration.
The results in Table 8 indicate distinct performance proﬁles per 
agent, driven by dataset volume and algorithmic mechanics. First, the 
signiﬁcant disparity in total experimental time between the synthetic 
datasets (AC and BC) and the Real-world dataset is primarily due to 
the temporal scope of the data. The synthetic environments simulate 90 
days, whereas the Real-world dataset comprises only 16 days.
Regarding the algorithms, the SL baseline consistently demonstrated 
the highest computational eﬃciency, achieving the lowest total execu-
tion times and step latencies across all datasets. This is attributed to the 
absence of complex reinforcement learning mechanisms, such as Bell-
man equation updates, target network synchronization, and future re-
ward estimation, which allows the supervised model to focus solely on 
the forward and backward passes of the neural network.
Among the RL agents, although DQL often incurs a slightly higher 
per-step training latency due to processing batches of 100 samples, its 
total execution time is consistently lower than that of DSGnSARSA. This 
occurs because DQL performs optimization updates only once every 10 
timesteps. In contrast, DSGnSARSA updates its policy at every timestep 
using the last 𝑛 records, resulting in a much higher cumulative compu-
tational cost despite its lower per-step latency. Finally, the increase in 
runtime observed in the “composite” approach compared to the “sim-
ple” one reﬂects the complexity of the state space.
In terms of memory usage, the average footprint for all agent models 
remained extremely low. The Supervised baseline served as the lower 
bound, requiring approximately 20 KB to store the neural network pa-
rameters. Conversely, the DQL agent required approximately 34 KB. De-
spite sharing the same network architecture, the DQL framework incurs 
additional overhead due to maintaining the Target Network and the Ex-
perience Replay buﬀer. The DSGnSARSA agents presented an interme-
diate footprint of around 22 KB. These compact memory requirements, 
paired with CPU-based execution, highlight the feasibility of deploying 
the proposed solution on resource-constrained edge devices.
Crucially, the “Train step latency” presented in Table 8 demonstrates 
the system’s capability for real-time, online learning. Since the proposed 
algorithms perform incremental updates continuously as new interac-
tions occur, this latency represents the time required to incorporate 
new user feedback into the model immediately. Given that the com-
putational costs for the RL approaches fall within the 1.5–2.3 ms range 
on CPU-based execution, the overhead of online updates renders itself 
negligible. Consequently, in a real-world deployment, perceptible la-
tency would primarily result from network infrastructure and hardware 
communication constraints rather than algorithmic processing. This val-
idates the system’s capacity to adapt to dynamic user behavior via con-
tinuous learning with minimal operational impact. 
6.5.  Discussion of results
The results presented in this section reveal signiﬁcant trends that 
warrant deeper analysis. In this section, we will discuss the signiﬁ-
cance of these ﬁndings and their implications within the context of the 
study. An important point to highlight is that, in addition to using three 
datasets in our experiments, we simulated multiple diﬀerent actuator 
devices with which the agents worked. We used 3 control agents for ac-
tuator devices during experiments with the Real-world dataset, 13 with 
the AC dataset, and 17 with the BC dataset. In other words, the gener-
alization capacity was tested and observed even more times.
From a general perspective, both RL algorithms demonstrated robust 
convergence, achieving HHS scores exceeding 96.88% in the simple-
state approach and 93.80% in the composite-state approach, eﬀectively 
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
15 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
Table 8 
Average experiment runtimes and latency metrics for training and inference of the RL agents (in seconds).
 Dataset
 Approach
 Algorithm
 Experiment time (s)
 Train step latency (s)
 Inference step latency (s)
 AC dataset
 simple
DQL
 1258.11
 0.0023
 0.0029
DSGnSARSA
 1827.29
 0.0015
 0.0018
SL baseline
 996.78
 0.0010
 0.0020
 composite
DQL
 1495.72
 0.0018
 0.0024
DSGnSARSA
 2086.03
 0.0015
 0.0022
SL baseline
 1210.02
 0.0009
 0.0020
 BC dataset
 simple
DQL
 2334.93
 0.0022
 0.0024
DSGnSARSA
 3312.16
 0.0015
 0.0022
SL baseline
 1881.49
 0.0010
 0.0020
 composite
DQL
 2811.93
 0.0016
 0.0029
DSGnSARSA
 3684.41
 0.0014
 0.0024
SL baseline
 2283.47
 0.0010
 0.0024
 Real-world dataset
 simple
DQL
 58.04
 0.0022
 0.0015
DSGnSARSA
 81.95
 0.0017
 0.0017
SL baseline
 33.76
 0.0009
 0.0009
 composite
DQL
 80.70
 0.0022
 0.0019
DSGnSARSA
 109.21
 0.0015
 0.0019
SL baseline
 48.01
 0.0009
 0.0010
satisfying user requirements in all scenarios. However, statistical analy-
sis reveals distinct performance dynamics. In the synthetic environments 
(AC and BC datasets), the hypothesis tests revealed statistically signiﬁ-
cant diﬀerences among the methods, with DSGnSARSA presenting lower 
HHS values than DQL, and both reinforcement learning agents present-
ing lower HHS values than the SL baseline. In the real-world dataset, 
the statistical analysis indicated lower HHS values for DQL than for DS-
GnSARSA, while both RL agents achieved lower HHS values than the SL 
baseline.
Additionally, it was observed that the two reward-based action-
selection strategies in our proposal performed better with the DQL
algorithm, but only in experiments with synthetic datasets. For the DS-
GnSARSA algorithm, the reward-based functions performed better only 
in the simple-state approach with the Real-world dataset. Designed to 
handle both smart home usage history and real-time user interactions, 
our RS was evaluated using an oﬄine evaluation protocol. The exper-
iments leveraged a real-world dataset alongside two synthetic datasets 
to validate the system and assess the performance of the employed al-
gorithms in both recorded real-world and simulated scenarios.
Furthermore, a more holistic view of the proposed system highlights 
that its impact goes beyond recommendation accuracy and algorith-
mic performance. By incorporating implicit feedback, usage history, 
and continuous user interaction, the system simultaneously contributes 
to resident comfort, energy eﬃciency, and adaptability to behavioral 
changes over time. The high HHS values indicate that the recommended 
actions align with user preferences, reducing manual interventions and 
improving the overall experience in the smart environment. At the same 
time, the model’s ability to adapt daily suggests potential to optimize 
device usage, avoid unnecessary activations, and encourage more eﬃ-
cient energy consumption patterns. Moreover, evaluation across scenar-
ios with multiple actuators, users, and routines demonstrates that the 
system is sensitive to contextual variations, adjusting its decisions as 
habits evolve or become more complex. This integrated perspective re-
inforces that the eﬀectiveness of a RS in SHs should be assessed not only 
through accuracy metrics, but also through its ability to balance well-
being, sustainability, and resilience to the dynamics of human behavior.
7.  Conclusion
This work contributes to the state of the art by proposing a RS for 
SH that models implicit feedback and its corresponding reward function, 
enabling autonomous personalization on smart devices. In addition, it 
presents a comparison between on-policy and oﬀ-policy reinforcement 
learning algorithms applied to the SH domain. The research also pro-
poses and analyzes two action-selection algorithms for reinforcement 
learning systems operating in environments with the potential for rou-
tine change, as well as a new metric for evaluating predictions in smart 
devices with composite states.
Throughout this work, we proposed an event-driven RS architecture 
focused on SHs that recommends actions for actuators in a smart en-
vironment. The unique features of this proposal include the approach 
to devices with simple and compound states, the modeling of implicit 
feedback, and the integration of user interaction into the RS learning 
process in dynamic environments. While there are studies proposing ar-
chitectures for similar scenarios, mention of user feedback is rare. In 
our architecture, this feedback is used to improve the learning models, 
allowing them to approximate the resident’s decisions as closely as pos-
sible and adapt to routine changes.
The conducted experiments evaluated the behavior of two RL al-
gorithms, benchmarking them against an online SL baseline. The per-
formance was analyzed daily to verify the model’s ability to adapt to 
new resident routines, spanning diverse user patterns, counts, and smart 
device conﬁgurations. The proposed approach achieved HHS values ex-
ceeding 96.88% in simple-state scenarios and 93.80% in composite-state 
scenarios.
7.1.  Limitations
It is essential to acknowledge the inherent limitations of the method-
ology and the research’s scope, which may aﬀect the generalizability of 
the results. The main limitations identiﬁed are:
• Lack of real-time deployment: The experiments performed in this 
work, including those using the real-world dataset, were conducted 
retrospectively (oﬄine experiments). The proposed RS was not de-
ployed in a live smart home environment with active users. There-
fore, factors such as the user’s psychological reaction to recommen-
dations (e.g., trust, annoyance, or habit adaptation over time) could 
not be directly measured.
• Limited variety of reinforcement learning algorithms explored:
This study focused on the application of only two RL algorithms. 
The vast range of existing algorithms in the RL ﬁeld, including those 
with distinct approaches (such as actor-critic algorithms), was not 
explored. This restriction may mean that other RL algorithms could 
oﬀer better results for the SHs scenario.
• Sample Size (N=17): The sample size for the Real-world dataset 
appears very limited (N=17), which raises concerns about general-
izability. While the real-world dataset is necessarily small due to the 
constraints of collecting high-quality, longitudinal smart-home inter-
action data, it serves a complementary role in our evaluation. Nev-
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
16 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
ertheless, we agree that a small cohort may not adequately represent 
the heterogeneity of smart home users in terms of daily routines, de-
vice usage patterns, behavioral variability, and adaptation to recom-
mendations over time. This limitation is particularly relevant for re-
inforcement learning–based systems, where policy convergence and 
reward dynamics can be sensitive to user-speciﬁc behaviors. For this 
reason, the Real-world dataset is interpreted primarily as a proof of 
applicability under realistic conditions, while broader generalization 
claims rely on complementary experiments conducted with larger 
synthetic datasets and multiple simulated actuator conﬁgurations.
7.2.  Future works
Based on the challenges and lessons learned, we outline the following 
directions for future work:
• Experimentation in real environments with users: Although sim-
ulated environments provide high representativeness and experi-
mental control, real-world smart home settings are inherently more 
complex, involving multiple rooms, multiple occupants with poten-
tially conﬂicting routines, and dynamic environmental conditions. 
We therefore plan to extend the real-world deployment to larger and 
more heterogeneous households, explicitly modeling multi-user in-
teractions, shared devices, and spatial context across rooms. In ad-
dition, future work will address operational constraints that are not 
fully captured in simulation, such as network latency, intermittent 
connectivity, sensor noise, and actuator malfunctions. These aspects 
will be studied through controlled fault-injection experiments and 
asynchronous communication models, enabling the evaluation of 
system robustness and adaptability under realistic failure conditions. 
This extended validation aims to narrow the gap between simulated 
and real-world environments and to further improve the ecological 
validity of the proposed approach.
• Integrating explicit feedback into the system: This type of feed-
back can require more eﬀort from the user, which often discourages 
its use. However, the approach’s viability increases if the option is 
oﬀered, allowing engaged users to provide direct feedback whenever 
they wish.
• Explaining the recommendations: Recommendation systems in 
smart homes are relatively new, and users in this context often have 
limited prior experience interacting with such systems. As a result, 
users may wish to understand why speciﬁc recommendations are 
being made. Therefore, a promising direction for future work is to 
develop explainability features that allow users to view and interpret 
the rationale behind the recommendations.
• Privacy and security: There is extensive research on privacy and 
security in recommendation systems and IoT. Given that smart home 
environments handle sensitive and personal data, it is essential to 
go beyond system functionality and develop studies that measure 
and evaluate the privacy and security properties of these algorithms 
in real-world settings. Accordingly, a focused investigation of these 
aspects is an important direction for future work.
• Experiment with other RL approaches: Based on the results ob-
tained in this paper, we envisage that additional RL methods can be 
applied in the smart home context, as well as that new RL methods 
can be developed speciﬁcally for smart home applications. Thus, as 
future work, we aim to develop new algorithms and propose adap-
tations for smart homes based on current RL approaches.
• Qualitative analyses in a real-world environment: Considering 
the future work outlined above, we plan to combine experimenta-
tion in real-world environments with privacy- and security-aware 
system design to develop a deployable solution capable of qualita-
tively evaluating user feedback and understanding how the proposed 
system improves users’ daily quality of life. In addition, we intend to 
develop a feature that provides users with real-time interpretability 
of the generated recommendations, allowing them to better under-
stand system behavior and decision-making processes.
The results demonstrate that this research contributed to the RSs 
and SHs scientiﬁc communities, advancing an underexplored topic that 
oﬀers several opportunities for improvement.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Denis Robson Dantas Boaventura: Conceptualization, Methodol-
ogy, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, 
Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization; Ed-
uardo Ferreira da Silva: Writing – Original Draft, Writing – review & 
editing; Mayki dos Santos Oliveira: Validation, Formal analysis, In-
vestigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & 
editing; Diego Corrêa da Silva: Writing – original draft, Writing – re-
view & editing.; Frederico Araújo Durão: Conceptualization, Writing 
– original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project admin-
istration.
Data availability
The code and data used in this work are referenced via a GitHub URL 
in a footnote in the Introduction.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References
Afsar, M. M., Crump, T., & Far, B. (2022). Reinforcement learning based recommender 
systems: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 55(7). https://doi.org/10.1145/3543846
Alomar, S., Alashwan, M., Busbaih, N., & Vizcarra, C. (2022). Smart home: Household 
appliance usage recommender and monitoring system (HARMS). In 2022 2nd Inter-
national conference on computing and information technology (ICCIT) (pp. 278–284). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIT52419.2022.9711598
Asare-Bediako, B., Kling, W. L., & Ribeiro, P. F. (2013). Multi-agent system architecture 
for smart home energy management and optimization. In IEEE PES ISGT Europe 2013 
(pp. 1–5). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISGTEurope.2013.6695331
Ashton, K. (1999). That ’internet of things’ thing. RFID Journal . https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:109032799.
B, D., Mathala, N. K., A, S., & K, I. (2024). Secure and energy-eﬃcient smart home au-
tomation: A user-based ﬁngerprint security system. In 2024 Third international confer-
ence on intelligent techniques in control, optimization and signal processing (INCOS) (pp. 
1–6). https://doi.org/10.1109/INCOS59338.2024.10527495
Carvalho, D. S., Santos, P. A., & Melo, F. S. (2025). Reinforcement learning in convergently 
non-stationary environments: Feudal hierarchies and learned representations. Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence, 347, 104382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2025.104382
Chen, X., Yao, L., McAuley, J., Zhou, G., & Wang, X. (2023). Deep reinforcement learning 
in recommender systems: A survey and new perspectives. Knowledge-Based Systems, 
264, 110335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2023.110335
CHÉ, N. K., Pardons, N., Vanrompay, Y., Preuveneers, D., & Berbers, Y. (2010). An in-
telligent domotics system to automate user actions. In J. C. Augusto, J. M. Corchado, 
P. Novais, & C. Analide (Eds.), Ambient intelligence and future trends-international sympo-
sium on ambient intelligence (ISAmi 2010) (pp. 201–204). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg.
Cook, D. J., Youngblood, M., Heierman, E. O., Gopalratnam, K., Rao, S., Litvin, A., & 
Khawaja, F. (2003). MavHome: An agent-based smart home. In Proceedings of the ﬁrst 
IEEE international conference on pervasive computing and communications, 2003. (percom 
2003). (pp. 521–524). https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCOM.2003.1192783
da Silva, D. C., Robson Dantas Boaventura, D., dos Santos Oliveira, M., Pereira Santos Ju-
nior, J., Ferreira da Silva, E., de Almeida, E. S., Prazeres, C. V. S., do Carmo Machado, 
I., Leone Maciel Peixoto, M., Bittencourt Figueiredo, G., & Durão, F. A. (2025). Eval-
uating multi-label machine learning models for smart home environments. Software: 
Practice and Experience, 55(9), 1427–1444. https://doi.org/10.1002/spe.3428
Davidoﬀ, S., Lee, M. K., Yiu, C., Zimmerman, J., & Dey, A. K. (2006). Principles of smart 
home control. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on ubiquitous comput-
ing UbiComp’06 (p. 19–34). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. https://doi.org/10.
1007/11853565_2
Ditzler, G., Roveri, M., Alippi, C., & Polikar, R. (2015). Learning in nonstationary en-
vironments: A survey. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine, 10(4), 12–25. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2015.2471196
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
17 

D.R.D. Boaventura et al.
dos Santos, O. M., Boaventura, D. R. D., Silva, E. F. D., Pires, J. M., Copque, I. S., San-
tos, B. P. d., Machado, I. d. C., Prazeres, C. V. S., Peixoto, M. L. M., Figueiredo, G. B., 
Almeida, E. S. d., Iwamoto, H. M., & Durão, F. A. (2025). Hestia: A home environ-
ment simulator targeting inhabitant activities. TechRxiv . https://doi.org/10.36227/
techrxiv.173888093.30111102/v2
Gokul, V., Kannan, P., Kumar, S., & Jacob, S. G. (2016). Deep q-learning for home au-
tomation. International Journal of Computer Applications, 152(6), 1–5. https://doi.org/
10.5120/ijca2016911873
Himeur, Y., Alsalemi, A., Al-Kababji, A., Bensaali, F., Amira, A., Sardianos, C., Dimi-
trakopoulos, G., & Varlamis, I. (2021). A survey of recommender systems for energy 
eﬃciency in buildings: Principles, challenges and prospects. Information Fusion, 72, 
1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inﬀus.2021.02.002
Jeon, H., Kim, J., Yoon, H., Lee, J., & Kang, U. (2022). Accurate action recommendation 
for smart home via two-level encoders and commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings 
of the 31st ACM international conference on information & knowledge management CIKM 
’22 (p. 832–841). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3511808.3557226
Jiménez-Bravo, D. M., Pérez-Marcos, J., H. De la Iglesia, D., Villarrubia González, G., & 
De Paz, J. F. (2019). Multi-agent recommendation system for electrical energy opti-
mization and cost saving in smart homes. Energies, 12(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/
en12071317
Kaur, E., Sharma, S., Verma, A., & Singh, M. (2019). An energy management and rec-
ommender system for lighting control in internet-of-energy enabled buildings. IFAC-
PapersOnLine, 52(4), 288–293. IFAC Workshop on Control of Smart Grid and Renew-
able Energy Systems CSGRES 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.08.213
Kazemi, S. M., Goel, R., Eghbali, S., Ramanan, J., Sahota, J., Thakur, S., Wu, S., Smyth, 
C., Poupart, P., & Brubaker, M. A. (2019). Time2vec: Learning a vector representation 
of time. http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.05321.
Khezzane, K., Doumbia, M. L., Khoucha, F., & Hissem, S. (2024). Multi-layer multi-
objective optimization for smart home energy management system with integration 
of user satisfaction concept. In 2024 Third international conference on sustainable mo-
bility applications, renewables and technology (SMART) (pp. 1–4). https://doi.org/10.
1109/SMART63170.2024.10815417
Kim, M. J., Cho, M. E., & Jun, H. J. (2020). Developing design solutions for smart homes 
through user-centered scenarios. Frontiers in Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.00335
Luo, F., Ranzi, G., Kong, W., Liang, G., & Dong, Z. Y. (2021). Personalized residen-
tial energy usage recommendation system based on load monitoring and collabo-
rative ﬁltering. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 17(2), 1253–1262. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TII.2020.2983212
Mirra, J., Silva, F., & Analide, C. (2018). Reinforcement learning based approach for smart 
homes. In Intelligent environments 2018 (pp. 38–47). (vol. 23). Ambient Intelligence and 
Smart Environments. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-874-7-38
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., & Ried-
miller, M. (2013). Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. https://arxiv.org/
abs/1312.5602.
Morales, M. (2020). Grokking deep reinforcement learning. Manning.
Mozer, M. C. (1998). The neural network house: An environment that adapts to its inhab-
itants. In Proc. AAAI spring symp. intelligent environments (pp. 110–114). (vol. 58).
Padakandla, S., Prabuchandran, K. J., & Bhatnagar, S. (2020). Reinforcement learning 
algorithm for non-stationary environments. Applied Intelligence, 50(11), 3590–3606. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-01758-5
Rashdan, M., Ahmad Almhaileej, H. Y., Almutairi, S. A., Eissa Ashkanani, F. K., Alhashimi, 
A. H., & Yousef Madoh, R. H. (2025). IoT-based home automation system for smart 
living. In 2025 6th International conference on bio-engineering for smart technologies (bioS-
MART) (pp. 1–4). https://doi.org/10.1109/BioSMART66413.2025.11046048
Reaz, M. B. I., Assim, A., Ibrahimy, M., Choong, F., & Mohd-Yasin, F. (2008). Hardware 
simulation of home automation using pattern matching and reinforcement learning for 
disabled people. In IC-AI (pp. 213–218).
Ricci, F., Rokach, L., & Shapira, B. (2022). Recommender systems handbook. In F. Ricci, 
L. Rokach, & B. Shapira (Eds.), Recommender systems handbook (pp. 1–35). New York, 
NY: Springer US. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-2197-4
Rodríguez Fernández, M., Cortés García, A., González Alonso, I., & Zalama Casanova, E. 
(2015). Using the big data generated by the smart home to improve energy eﬃciency 
management. Energies, (p. 249–260). https://doi.org/10.1007/s12053-015-9361-3
Sun, J., Shen, Y., Wang, Y., & Wang, Y. (2025). A memristor-based neural network circuit 
with retrospective revaluation eﬀect and application in intelligent household robots. 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 36(6), 11466–11478. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3539842
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. (2nd ed.). 
The MIT Press. http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., & 
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of the 31st international 
conference on neural information processing systems NIPS’17 (p. 6000–6010). Red Hook, 
NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc.
Wang, H., Cao, H., & Yang, L. (2024). Machine learning-driven multidomain nanomaterial 
design: From bibliometric analysis to applications. ACS Applied Nano Materials, 7(23), 
26579–26600. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsanm.4c04940
Wang, H., Yang, L., Leng, D., Du, Y., & Ning, H. (2025). Accelerating the discovery and 
optimization of metal-organic framework materials via machine learning. Advances in 
Colloid and Interface Science, 346, 103671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2025.103671
Yang, L., Wang, H., Leng, D., Fang, S., Yang, Y., & Du, Y. (2024). Machine learning applica-
tions in nanomaterials: Recent advances and future perspectives. Chemical Engineering 
Journal, 500, 156687. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.156687
Yang, Y., Wu, L., Yin, G., Li, L., & Zhao, H. (2017). A survey on security and privacy 
issues in internet-of-things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 4(5), 1250–1258. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2017.2694844
Yu, L., Xie, W., Xie, D., Zou, Y., Zhang, D., Sun, Z., Zhang, L., Zhang, Y., & Jiang, T. 
(2020). Deep reinforcement learning for smart home energy management. IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, 7(4), 2751–2762. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2957289
Zhang, S., Tay, Y., Yao, L., Sun, A., & Zhang, C. (2022). Deep learning for recom-
mender systems. In F. Ricci, L. Rokach, & B. Shapira (Eds.), Recommender systems
handbook (3rd edition) (pp. 173–210). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-0716-2197-4_5
Expert Systems With Applications 318 (2026) 131805 
18 
